Macbeth /məkˈbɛθ/, fully The Tragedy of Macbeth, is a tragedy by
William Shakespeare. It was probably first performed in 1606.
[a]
It
was first published in the Folio of 1623, possibly from a prompt book,
and is Shakespeare's shortest tragedy.
[1]
Macbeth is a Scottish general who has been fighting for King
Duncan. Three witches tell Macbeth that he will become king of
Scotland. Macbeth is spurred by his ambition and his wife, and he
murders Duncan and accedes to the throne. His reign is bloody and
tyrannical and ended by the combined forces of Scotland and
England.
Shakespeare's main source for the story was Holinshed's Chronicles,
particularly its accounts of Macbeth and Macduff and Duncan, but
events in the play differ extensively from events involving the
historical Macbeth. Events in Shakespeare's play are usually
associated with Henry Garnet and the Gunpowder Plot of 1605.[2]
In theatre Macbeth has been associated with a curse. People have
avoided speaking its title, calling it "The Scottish Play". However, it
has attracted some of the most renowned actors to the leading roles
and has been adapted for multifarious other media. It has been
continuously in production since the 1660s.
[3]
Three witches resolve to meet Macbeth after the battle. Victory is
reported to King Duncan. Duncan is impressed by reports of
Macbeth's conduct so transfers the rebellious Thane of Cawdor's title
to him. The witches meet Macbeth and Banquo. The witches
prophesy to Macbeth then Banquo then vanish. Ross and Angus
arrive with news that accords with that same "prophetic greeting"
(1.3.78). Macbeth muses much on "the swelling act / Of the imperial
theme" (1.3.130-31) before suggesting they all move on. They meet
Duncan. Duncan names Malcolm (Duncan's son) heir then says he
will stay with Macbeth. Macbeth sets off ahead to tell his wife.
Macbeth's wife has a letter from Macbeth. She muses too on the
prospect of Macbeth becoming king as prophesied. She is interrupted
by a messenger then by Macbeth. She advises Macbeth that Duncan
must be "provided for" (1.5.67). Duncan arrives and is received
kindly. Macbeth steps out from dining with Duncan and worries about consequences of killing him. His wife
allays his anxiety and he is "settled" (1.7.80).
At night Banquo broaches the witches to Macbeth. Macbeth says he
"think[s] not of them" (2.1.22) but would discuss the business at a
suitable time. Macbeth's wife is waiting anxiously for Macbeth to kill
Duncan. Macbeth arrives and is extremely distressed. He says that he
has "done the deed" (2.2.15). He has brought the daggers which he
should have planted with the drugged grooms but refuses to go back.
His wife takes them and stresses the importance of smearing the
grooms with blood. Macduff and Lennox are met at the gate then led
to Duncan's door. Macduff goes through then Macbeth and Lennox
discuss the "unruly" (2.3.54) night. Macduff reappears and proclaims
horror. Macbeth and Lennox go through then Macduff raises an alarm
to which all convene. "Those of his chamber" (2.3.102) are blamed
and killed by Macbeth. All agree to meet and discuss besides
Malcolm and Donalbain (Duncan's two sons) who flee. Ross
discusses the situation with an old man until Macduff arrives with
news that Malcolm and Donalbain are fled and held in suspicion and
that Macbeth is named king.
Banquo muses on the situation. Macbeth and his wife are now king and queen and they meet Banquo then
invite him to a feast. Macbeth has achieved what was prophesied for himself but disapproves of what was
prophesied for Banquo (that he would "get kings, though [himself] be none" (1.3.67)). He meets two
murderers therefore. They agree to kill Banquo and Fleance (Banquo's son). Macbeth and his wife discuss
Banquo. Three murderers kill Banquo but Fleance escapes. Macbeth receives such news then sees Banquo's
ghost sitting in his place at the feast. Macbeth reacts thereto and thereby "displace[s] the mirth" (3.4.107). He
tells his wife that he will visit the witches tomorrow. Lennox questions a lord about Macduff.
Act I
Act II
Act III
Act IV
The Banquet Scene in
Shakespeare's "Macbeth", Daniel
Maclise (1840)
Macbeth consulting the
Vision of the Armed Head
by Johann Heinrich Füssli
Lady Macbeth sleepwalking
by Johann Heinrich Füssli
Macbeth meets the witches. They
conjure apparitions to address his
concerns then vanish. Macbeth learns
that Macduff is in England. He has
just been warned to "Beware
Macduff" (4.1.70) so resolves to
seize Macduff's property and
slaughter his family. Ross discusses
Macduff's flight with Macduff's wife
then leaves her. A messenger advises
Macduff's wife to flee then does so
himself. Murderers enter. One of
them kills her son. She flees while "crying 'Murder'" (SD 4.2.87). In England
Malcolm goads Macduff to a "noble passion" (4.3.114). He is convinced
thereby of Macduff's "good truth and honour" (4.3.117) so tells him that he
has soldiers ready. Ross arrives and they share news including such of
Macduff's slaughtered family.
A doctor and a gentlewoman observe Macbeth's wife walking and talking and
apparently asleep. Military action against Macbeth begins with marches.
Macbeth dismisses the news thereof and quotes the apparitions. The doctor
tells Macbeth that he cannot cure Macbeth's wife. The forces marching
against Macbeth all meet then move on against Macbeth. Macbeth continues
to scoff at them until he is told that his wife is dead. He muses on futility and
what the apparitions told him. Macduff seeks Macbeth in the field while
Malcolm takes the castle. Macduff finds Macbeth. Macbeth is confident until
he realises that he has misinterpreted the apparitions. His nihilism peaks but he
will not yield. Macduff takes Macbeth's head to Malcolm and hails him King
of Scotland. Malcolm distributes titles.
(Although Malcolm, not Fleance, is placed on the throne, the witches'
prophecy concerning Banquo ("Thou shalt get kings") was known to the
audience of Shakespeare's time to be true: James VI of Scotland (later also
James I of England) was supposedly a descendant of Banquo.[4]
)
A principal source was the Daemonologie of King James, published in 1597. Daemonologie includes a news
pamphlet, Newes from Scotland, which detailed the famous North Berwick Witch Trials of 1590.[6]
Daemonologie was published several years before Macbeth was performed with themes and setting in a direct
and comparative contrast with King James' personal experiences with witchcraft. Not only had this trial taken
place in Scotland, the witches involved were recorded to have also conducted rituals with the same
mannerisms as the three witches. One of the evidenced passages is referenced when the witches involved in
the trial confessed to attempt the use of witchcraft to raise a tempest and sabotage the very boat King James
and his queen were on board during their return trip from Denmark. This was significant as one ship sailing
with King James' fleet actually sank in the storm. The three witches in Macbeth discuss the raising of winds at
sea in the opening lines of Act 1 Scene 3.[7]
Act V
Sources
Title page of a 1603 reprinting of
Daemonologie The first edition of Raphael
Holinshed's Chronicles of England,
Scotlande, and Irelande, printed in
1577
Macbeth and Banquo encountering
the witches from Holinshed's
Chronicles (1577)
[5]
Macbeth has been compared
with Shakespeare's Antony
and Cleopatra. As
characters, both Antony and
Macbeth seek a new world,
even at the cost of the old
one. Both fight for a throne
and have a 'nemesis' to face
to achieve that throne. The
nemesis for Antony is
Octavius, and the nemesis for
Macbeth is Banquo. At one
point Macbeth even
compares himself to Antony,
saying "under [Banquo] / My
Genius is rebuked, as it is
said / Mark Antony's was by
Caesar" (3.1.54-56). Both
plays also contain powerful
and manipulative female
figures, Cleopatra and Lady
Macbeth.[8] Shakespeare was
probably writing both plays simultaneously.
Shakespeare assembled his story from several tales which he had
found in Holinshed's Chronicles, a popular history of the British Isles,
familiar to Shakespeare's contemporaries. In the Chronicles, a man
named Donwald finds several of his family put to death by his king,
King Duff, for dealing with witches. After being pressured by his
wife, Donwald and four of his servants kill the King in his own
house. In the Chronicles, Macbeth is portrayed as struggling to
support the kingdom in the face of King Duncan's ineptitude.
Macbeth and Banquo meet three witches who prophesy as in
Shakespeare's version. Macbeth and Banquo then plot the murder of
Duncan together, at Lady Macbeth's urging. Macbeth reigns for ten
years before being overthrown by Macduff and Malcolm. Some
scholars think that George Buchanan's Rerum Scoticarum Historia
matches Shakespeare's version more closely. Buchanan's work was available to Shakespeare in Latin.[9]
Neither the Weird Sisters nor Banquo nor Lady Macbeth are mentioned in any known medieval account of
Macbeth's reign, and of these only Lady Macbeth (Gruoch of Scotland) actually existed.[10] They were first
mentioned in 1527, in Historia Gentis Scotorum (History of the Scottish People), a book by Scottish historian
Hector Boece. Boece wanted to denigrate Macbeth and strengthen the claim of the House of Stewart to the
Scottish throne.
[10] He portrayed Banquo as an ancestor of the Stewart kings of Scotland, adding in a
prophecy that the descendants of Banquo would be the rightful kings of Scotland. The Weird Sisters served to
give a picture of King Macbeth as gaining the throne via dark and supernatural forces.
[10] Macbeth did have a
wife, but it is not clear if she was as power-hungry and ambitious as Boece portrayed her, which served his
purpose of having even Macbeth realise that he lacked a proper claim to the throne, and only took it at the
urging of his wife.
[10] Holinshed accepted Boece's version of Macbeth's reign at face value and included it in
his Chronicles.
[10] Shakespeare saw the dramatic possibilities in the story as related by Holinshed and used it
as the basis for the play.
[10]
Only Shakespeare's version of the story involves Macbeth killing the king in Macbeth's own castle. Scholars
have seen this change as adding the worst violation of hospitality. Common versions at the time involved
Duncan being killed in an ambush at Inverness. Shakespeare conflated the story of Donwald and King Duff in
what was a significant change to the story.
[11]
Shakespeare made another important change. In the Chronicles, Banquo is an accomplice in Macbeth's murder
of King Duncan and plays an important part in ensuring that Macbeth, not Malcolm, takes the throne in the
coup that follows.
[12]
It was established in the 19th century that Banquo is not actually a historical person, but
in Shakespeare's day Banquo was thought to be an ancestor of the Stuart King James I.
[13] To portray the
king's supposed ancestor as a murderer would have been risky. Other authors of the time who wrote about
Banquo, such as Jean de Schelandre in his Stuartide, also changed history by portraying Banquo as a noble
man and not a murderer, probably for the same reasons.
[14] Shakespeare may have altered Banquo's character
also because there was no dramatic need for another accomplice to the murder. There was, however, a need to
give a dramatic contrast to Macbeth, a role which many scholars argue is filled by Banquo.[12]
Other scholars maintain that a strong argument can be made for associating Macbeth with the Gunpowder Plot
of 1605.[2]
 As presented by Harold Bloom in 2008:
[S]cholars cite the existence of several topical references in Macbeth to the events of that year,
namely the execution of the Father Henry Garnett for his alleged complicity in the Gunpowder
Plot of 1605, as referenced in the porter's scene.
[2]
Those arrested for their role in the Gunpowder Plot refused to give direct answers to the questions posed to
them by their interrogators, which reflected the influence of the Jesuit practice of equivocation.
[15] By having
Macbeth speak of "juggling fiends [...] that palter with us in a double sense, / That keep the word of promise to
our ear, / And break it to our hope" (5.8.19-22. Mason), Shakespeare confirmed James's belief that
equivocation was a "wicked" practice, which reflected in turn the "wickedness" of the Catholic Church.[15]
Garnett had in his possession A Treatise on Equivocation. The Weird Sisters in the play often engage in
equivocation and so do the apparitions which they conjure. For example the third such apparition tells
Macbeth that he "shall never vanquished be until / Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill / Shall come
against him"(4.1.91-93).
[16] Macbeth interprets this utterance as meaning never, but it refers to the branches of
the trees which are carried by the troops to hide their numbers.
[17]
Macbeth cannot be dated precisely, but it is usually placed near to Shakespeare's other greatest tragedies,
Hamlet and Othello and King Lear.
[18] Some scholars have placed the original writing of the play as early as
1599,[2] but most believe that the play is unlikely to have been composed earlier than 1603, as the play is
widely seen to celebrate King James' ancestors and the Stuart accession to the throne in 1603. Many people
agree that Macbeth was written in the year 1606,[19][20][21] citing multiple allusions to the Gunpowder Plot of
1605 and its ensuing trials. However, A. R. Braunmuller finds the 1605–06 arguments inconclusive, and
argues only for an earliest date of 1603.[22] Simon Forman saw Macbeth at the Globe in 1610 or 1611.[23]
Macbeth was first printed in the First Folio of 1623.
When James became king of England, a feeling of uncertainty settled over the nation. James was a Scottish
king and the son of Mary, Queen of Scots, a staunch Catholic and English traitor. In the words of critic Robert
Crawford,
Date and text
Accession of James
King James I of England, attributed
to John de Critz (c.1605)
The Execution of the Conspirators in
the Gunpowder Plot, Claes Jansz
Visscher (1606)
Macbeth was a play for a post-Elizabethan England
facing up to what it might mean to have a Scottish king.
England seems comparatively benign, while its northern
neighbour is mired in a bloody, monarch-killing past. ...
Macbeth may have been set in medieval Scotland, but it
was filled with material of interest to England and
England's ruler.
[24]
Critics argue that the content of the play is clearly a message to James,
the new Scottish King of England. Likewise, the critic Andrew
Hadfield has noted the contrast which the play draws between the
saintly King Edward the Confessor of England, who has the power of
the royal touch to cure scrofula, and whose realm is portrayed as
peaceful and prosperous, against the bloody chaos of Scotland.[25]
In
his 1598 book, The Trew Law of Free Monarchies, James had
asserted that kings are always right, if not just, and that his subjects
owe him total loyalty at all times, writing that even if a king is a
tyrant, his subjects must never rebel and just endure his tyranny for
their own good.[26] James had argued that the tyranny was preferable
to the problems caused by rebellion. By contrast, Shakespeare argued
in Macbeth for the right of the subjects to overthrow a tyrant king, an
implied criticism of James's theories if applied to England.[26]
Hadfield has also noted a curious aspect of the play, its implication
that primogeniture is the norm in Scotland, but Duncan has to nominate his son Malcolm to be his successor
while Macbeth is accepted without protest by the Scottish lairds as their king despite being an usurper.
[27]
Hadfield has argued that this aspect of the play, the thanes apparently choosing their king, was a reference to
the Stuart claim to the English throne, and the attempts of the English Parliament to block the succession of
James's Catholic mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, from succeeding to the English throne.
[28] Hadfield has
argued that Shakespeare had implied that James was indeed the rightful king of England, but owed his throne
not to divine favour, as James would have it, but rather due to the willingness of the English Parliament to
accept the Protestant son of the Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots, as their king.
[28] James believed himself
descended from Banquo,
[29] which suggests to some people that the parade of eight kings in Act 4 is a
compliment to King James.
[30]
Macbeth is an anomaly among Shakespeare's tragedies in certain
critical ways. It is short: more than a thousand lines shorter than
Othello and King Lear, and only slightly over half the length of
Hamlet. This brevity has suggested to many critics that the received
version is based on a heavily cut source, perhaps a prompt-book for a
particular performance. This would reflect other Shakespeare plays
existing in both Quarto and the Folio, where the Quarto versions are
usually longer than the Folio versions. Macbeth was first printed in
the First Folio and has no Quarto version – if there was a Quarto
version, it would probably be longer than the Folio version.[52] The
brevity has also been connected to other unusual features: the fast
pace of the first act has seemed to be "stripped for action", and the
comparative flatness of characters other than Macbeth is unusual,
[53]
and the strangeness of Macbeth himself when compared with other of
Shakespeare's tragic heroes is odd. A. C. Bradley, in considering this
question, concluded that the play "always was an extremely short
one", noting that the witch scenes and battle scenes would have taken
up some time in performance. He remarked: "I do not think that, in
reading, we feel Macbeth to be short: certainly we are astonished
when we hear it is about half as long as Hamlet. Perhaps in the Shakespearean theatre too it seemed to occupy
a longer time than the clock recorded."[52]
At least since the days of Alexander Pope and Samuel Johnson,
analysis of the play has centred on the question of Macbeth's
ambition, commonly seen as so dominant a trait that it defines the
character. Johnson asserted that Macbeth, though esteemed for his
military bravery, is wholly reviled.
This opinion recurs in critical literature. According to Caroline
Spurgeon it is also supported by Shakespeare himself, who apparently
intended to degrade his hero by vesting Macbeth with clothes
unsuited to him and to make him look ridiculous by several nimisms
he applies: His garments seem either too big or too small for him – as
his ambition is too big and his character too small for his new and
Themes and motifs
As a tragedy of character
unrightful role as king. When he feels as if "dressed in borrowed robes", after his new title as Thane of
Cawdor, prophesied by the witches, has been confirmed by Ross (I, 3, ll. 108–109), Banquo comments:
"New honours come upon him,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould,
But with the aid of use" (I, 3, ll. 145–146).
And, at the end, when Macbeth is at bay at Dunsinane, Caithness sees him as a man trying in vain to fasten a
large garment on him with too small a belt:
"He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
Within the belt of rule" (V, 2, ll. 14–15)
Angus, in a similar nimism, sums up what everybody has thought since Macbeth's accession to power:
"now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
upon a dwarfish thief" (V, 2, ll. 18–20).
[54]
Like Shakespeare's Richard III of England, but without that character's perversely appealing exuberance,
Macbeth wades through blood until his inevitable fall. As Kenneth Muir writes, "Macbeth has not a
predisposition to murder; he has merely an inordinate ambition that makes murder itself seem to be a lesser evil
than failure to achieve the crown."[55]
Yet for other critics it has not been so easy to resolve the question of Macbeth's motivation. Robert Bridges, for
example, perceived a paradox: a character able to express such convincing horror before Duncan's murder
would likely be incapable of committing the crime.
[56] For many critics, Macbeth's motivations in the first act
appear vague and insufficient. John Dover Wilson hypothesised that Shakespeare's original text had an extra
scene or scenes where husband and wife discussed their plans. This interpretation is not fully provable.
However, the motivating role of ambition for Macbeth is universally recognised. The evil actions motivated by
his ambition seem to trap him in a cycle of increasing evil, as Macbeth himself recognises:
"I am in blood
Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er" (III, 4, ll. 134-36).
While working on Russian translations of Shakespeare's works, Boris Pasternak compared Macbeth to
Raskolnikov, the protagonist of Crime and Punishment by Fyodor Dostoevsky. Pasternak argues that "neither
Macbeth or Raskolnikov is a born criminal or a villain by nature. They are turned into criminals by faulty
rationalizations, by deductions from false premises." He goes on to argue that Lady Macbeth is "feminine ...
one of those active, insistent wives" who becomes her husband's "executive, more resolute and consistent than
he is himself." According to Pasternak, she is only helping Macbeth carry out his own wishes, to her own
detriment.
[57]
As a tragedy of moral order
Sir Nathaniel Dance-Holland, The
Daggers Being Given to Lady
Macbeth (n.d.)
Sir Nathaniel Dance-Holland, Lady
Macbeth Taking the Daggers (n.d.)
"Macbeth", Act I, Scene 3, the Weird
Sisters, Henry Fuseli (c.1783)
Lady Macbeth Seizing the Daggers,
Henry Fuseli (c.1812)
The disastrous consequences
of Macbeth's ambition are not
limited to him. Almost from
the moment of the murder,
the play depicts Scotland as a
land shaken by inversions of
the natural order.
Shakespeare may have
intended a reference to the
great chain of being, although
the play's images of disorder
are mostly not specific
enough to support detailed
intellectual readings.
[58] He
may also have intended an
elaborate compliment to
James's belief in the divine
right of kings, although this
hypothesis, outlined at
greatest length by Henry N.
Paul, is not universally
accepted. As in Julius
Caesar, though, perturbations
in the political sphere are
echoed and even amplified by events in the material world. Among
the most often depicted of the inversions of the natural order is sleep.
Macbeth says: "Methought I heard a voice cry, 'Sleep no more. / Macbeth does murder sleep'" (2.2.36-37), and
this is figuratively mirrored in Lady Macbeth's sleepwalking.
Macbeth's generally accepted indebtedness to medieval tragedy is often seen as significant in the play's
treatment of moral order. Glynne Wickham connects the play, through the Porter, to a mystery play on the
harrowing of hell. Howard Felperin argues that the play has a more complex attitude toward "orthodox
Christian tragedy" than is often admitted. He sees a kinship between the play and the tyrant plays within the
medieval liturgical drama.
The theme of androgyny is
often seen as a special aspect
of the theme of disorder.
Inversion of normative
gender roles is most famously
associated with the witches
and with Lady Macbeth as
she appears in the first act.
Whatever Shakespeare's
degree of sympathy with
such inversions, the play ends
with a thorough return to
normative gender values.
Some feminist psychoanalytic
critics, such as Janet Adelman, have connected the play's treatment of gender roles to its larger theme of
inverted natural order. In this light, Macbeth is punished for his violation of the moral order by being removed
from the cycles of nature (which are figured as female). Nature itself (as embodied in the movement of Birnam
Wood) is part of the restoration of moral order.
Macbeth and Banquo with the
Witches by Henry Fuseli
Critics in the early twentieth century reacted against what they saw as an excessive dependence on the study of
character in criticism of the play. This dependence, though most closely associated with Andrew Cecil
Bradley, is clear as early as the time of Mary Cowden Clarke, who offered precise, if fanciful, accounts of the
predramatic lives of Shakespeare's female leads. For example she suggested that the child which Lady
Macbeth refers to in the first act died during a foolish military action.
In the play, the Three Witches represent darkness and chaos and
conflict, while their role is as agents and witnesses.
[59] Their presence
communicates treason and impending doom. During Shakespeare's
day, witches were seen as worse than rebels, "the most notorious
traytor and rebell that can be."[60] They were not only political
traitors, but spiritual traitors as well. Much of the confusion that
springs from them comes from their ability to straddle the play's
borders between reality and the supernatural: They are so deeply
entrenched in both worlds that it is unclear whether they control fate
or whether they are merely its agents. They defy logic, not being
subject to the rules of the real world.[61]
The witches' lines in the first act, "Fair is foul, and foul is fair: Hover
through the fog and filthy air" (1.1.9–10), are often said to set the tone
for the rest of the play, by establishing a sense of confusion. Indeed,
the play is filled with situations where evil is depicted as good, while
good is rendered evil. The line "Double, double, toil and trouble"
(4.1.10 ff) communicates the witches' intent clearly: They seek only
trouble for the mortals around them.
[62] The witches' spells are
remarkably similar to the spells of the witch Medusa in Anthony Munday's play Fidele and Fortunio
published in 1584, and Shakespeare may have been influenced by these.
The witches do not tell Macbeth directly to kill King Duncan; they use a subtle form of temptation when they
tell Macbeth that he will be king. By placing the thought in his mind, they effectively guide him on the path to
his own destruction. This follows the pattern of temptation used at the time of Shakespeare. First, they argued,
a thought is put in a man's mind, then the person may either indulge in the thought or reject it. Macbeth
indulges in it, while Banquo rejects.
[62]
According to J.A. Bryant Jr., Macbeth also makes use of Biblical parallels, notably between King Duncan's
murder and the murder of Christ:
No matter how one looks at it, whether as history or as tragedy, Macbeth is distinctively Christian.
One may simply count the Biblical allusions as Richmond Noble has done; one may go further
and study the parallels between Shakespeare's story and the Old Testament stories of Saul and
Jezebel as Miss Jane H. Jack has done; or one may examine with W.C. Curry the progressive
degeneration of Macbeth from the point of view of medieval theology.
[63]
