Romeo and Juliet is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare early
in his career about two young star-crossed lovers whose deaths
ultimately reconcile their feuding families. It was among
Shakespeare's most popular plays during his lifetime and, along with
Hamlet, is one of his most frequently performed plays. Today, the
title characters are regarded as archetypal young lovers.
Romeo and Juliet belongs to a tradition of tragic romances stretching
back to antiquity. The plot is based on an Italian tale translated into
verse as The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet by Arthur
Brooke in 1562 and retold in prose in Palace of Pleasure by William
Painter in 1567. Shakespeare borrowed heavily from both but
expanded the plot by developing a number of supporting characters,
particularly Mercutio and Paris. Believed to have been written
between 1591 and 1595, the play was first published in a quarto
version in 1597. The text of the first quarto version was of poor
quality, however, and later editions corrected the text to conform
more closely with Shakespeare's original.
Shakespeare's use of his poetic dramatic structure (especially effects
such as switching between comedy and tragedy to heighten tension,
his expansion of minor characters, and his use of sub-plots to
embellish the story) has been praised as an early sign of his dramatic
skill. The play ascribes different poetic forms to different characters,
sometimes changing the form as the character develops. Romeo, for
example, grows more adept at the sonnet over the course of the play.
Romeo and Juliet has been adapted numerous times for stage, film,
musical, and opera venues. During the English Restoration, it was
revived and heavily revised by William Davenant. David Garrick's
18th-century version also modified several scenes, removing material
then considered indecent, and Georg Benda's Romeo und Julie
omitted much of the action and used a happy ending. Performances
in the 19th century, including Charlotte Cushman's, restored the
original text and focused on greater realism. John Gielgud's 1935
version kept very close to Shakespeare's text and used Elizabethan
costumes and staging to enhance the drama. In the 20th and into the
21st century, the play has been adapted in versions as diverse as
George Cukor's 1936 film Romeo and Juliet, Franco Zeffirelli's 1968
version Romeo and Juliet, and Baz Luhrmann's 1996 MTV-inspired
Romeo + Juliet.
The play, set in Verona, Italy, begins with a street brawl between Montague
and Capulet servants who, like their masters, are sworn enemies. Prince
Escalus of Verona intervenes and declares that further breach of the peace will
be punishable by death. Later, Count Paris talks to Capulet about marrying his
daughter Juliet, but Capulet asks Paris to wait another two years and invites
him to attend a planned Capulet ball. Lady Capulet and Juliet's Nurse try to
persuade Juliet to accept Paris's courtship.
Meanwhile, Benvolio talks with his cousin Romeo, Montague's son, about
Romeo's recent depression. Benvolio discovers that it stems from unrequited
infatuation for a girl named Rosaline, one of Capulet's nieces. Persuaded by
Benvolio and Mercutio, Romeo attends the ball at the Capulet house in hopes
of meeting Rosaline. However, Romeo instead meets and falls in love with
Juliet. Juliet's cousin, Tybalt, is enraged at Romeo for sneaking into the ball
but is only stopped from killing Romeo by Juliet's father, who does not wish
to shed blood in his house. After the ball, in what is now called the "balcony
scene", Romeo sneaks into the Capulet orchard and overhears Juliet at her
window vowing her love to him in spite of her family's hatred of the
Montagues. Romeo makes himself known to her, and they agree to be
married. With the help of Friar Laurence, who hopes to reconcile the two families through their children's
union, they are secretly married the next day.
Tybalt, meanwhile, still incensed that Romeo had sneaked into the Capulet ball, challenges him to a duel.
Romeo, now considering Tybalt his kinsman, refuses to fight. Mercutio is offended by Tybalt's insolence, as
well as Romeo's "vile submission",
[1] and accepts the duel on Romeo's behalf. Mercutio is fatally wounded
when Romeo attempts to break up the fight. Grief-stricken and wracked with guilt, Romeo confronts and slays
Tybalt.
House of Capulet
Capulet is the patriarch of the house of
Capulet.
Lady Capulet is the matriarch of the house
of Capulet.
Juliet Capulet is the 13-year-old daughter of
Capulet, the play's female protagonist.
Tybalt is a cousin of Juliet, the nephew of
Lady Capulet.
The Nurse is Juliet's personal attendant and
confidante.
Rosaline is Lord Capulet's niece, Romeo's
love in the beginning of the story.
Peter, Sampson, and Gregory are servants
of the Capulet household.
House of Montague
Montague is the patriarch of the house of
Montague.
Lady Montague is the matriarch of the house
of Montague.
Romeo Montague, the son of Montague, is
the play's male protagonist.
Benvolio is Romeo's cousin and best friend.
Abram and Balthasar are servants of the
Montague household.
Others
Friar Laurence is a Franciscan friar and
Romeo's confidant.
Friar John is sent to deliver Friar Laurence's
letter to Romeo.
An Apothecary who reluctantly sells Romeo
poison.
A Chorus reads a prologue to each of the
first two acts.
Synopsis
Title page of Arthur Brooke's poem,
Romeus and Juliet
Benvolio argues that Romeo has justly executed Tybalt for the murder of Mercutio. The Prince, now having
lost a kinsman in the warring families' feud, exiles Romeo from Verona, under penalty of death if he ever
returns. Romeo secretly spends the night in Juliet's chamber, where they consummate their marriage. Capulet,
misinterpreting Juliet's grief, agrees to marry her to Count Paris and threatens to disown her when she refuses
to become Paris's "joyful bride".
[2] When she then pleads for the marriage to be delayed, her mother rejects
her.
Juliet visits Friar Laurence for help, and he offers her a potion that will put her into a deathlike coma or
catalepsy for "two and forty hours".
[3] The Friar promises to send a messenger to inform Romeo of the plan so
that he can rejoin her when she awakens. On the night before the wedding, she takes the drug and, when
discovered apparently dead, she is laid in the family crypt.
The messenger, however, does not reach Romeo and, instead, Romeo learns of Juliet's apparent death from his
servant, Balthasar. Heartbroken, Romeo buys poison from an apothecary and goes to the Capulet crypt. He
encounters Paris who has come to mourn Juliet privately. Believing Romeo to be a vandal, Paris confronts him
and, in the ensuing battle, Romeo kills Paris. Still believing Juliet to be dead, he drinks the poison. Juliet then
awakens and, discovering that Romeo is dead, stabs herself with his dagger and joins him in death. The
feuding families and the Prince meet at the tomb to find all three dead. Friar Laurence recounts the story of the
two "star-cross'd lovers". The families are reconciled by their children's deaths and agree to end their violent
feud. The play ends with the Prince's elegy for the lovers: "For never was a story of more woe / Than this of
Juliet and her Romeo."[4]
Romeo and Juliet borrows from a tradition of tragic love stories dating
back to antiquity. One of these is Pyramus and Thisbe, from Ovid's
Metamorphoses, which contains parallels to Shakespeare's story: the
lovers' parents despise each other, and Pyramus falsely believes his
lover Thisbe is dead.[5] The Ephesiaca of Xenophon of Ephesus,
written in the 3rd century, also contains several similarities to the play,
including the separation of the lovers, and a potion that induces a
deathlike sleep.[6]
One of the earliest references to the names Montague and Capulet is
from Dante's Divine Comedy, who mentions the Montecchi
(Montagues) and the Cappelletti (Capulets) in canto six of
Purgatorio:
[7]
Come and see, you who are negligent,
Montagues and Capulets, Monaldi and Filippeschi
One lot already grieving, the other in fear.
[8]
However, the reference is part of a polemic against the moral decay of
Florence, Lombardy, and the Italian Peninsula as a whole; Dante,
through his characters, chastises German King Albert I for neglecting his responsibilities towards Italy ("you
who are negligent"), and successive popes for their encroachment from purely spiritual affairs, thus leading to
a climate of incessant bickering and warfare between rival political parties in Lombardy. History records the
name of the family Montague as being lent to such a political party in Verona, but that of the Capulets as from
a Cremonese family, both of whom play out their conflict in Lombardy as a whole rather than within the
Sources
confines of Verona.
[9] Allied to rival political factions, the parties are grieving ("One lot already grieving")
because their endless warfare has led to the destruction of both parties,
[9]
rather than a grief from the loss of
their ill-fated offspring as the play sets forth, which appears to be a solely poetic creation within this context.
The earliest known version of the Romeo and Juliet tale akin to Shakespeare's play is the story of Mariotto and
Gianozza by Masuccio Salernitano, in the 33rd novel of his Il Novellino published in 1476.[10]
 Salernitano sets
the story in Siena and insists its events took place in his own lifetime. His version of the story includes the
secret marriage, the colluding friar, the fray where a prominent citizen is killed, Mariotto's exile, Gianozza's
forced marriage, the potion plot, and the crucial message that goes astray. In this version, Mariotto is caught
and beheaded and Gianozza dies of grief.
[11][12]
Luigi da Porto (1485–1529) adapted the story as Giulietta e Romeo
[13] and included it in his Historia
novellamente ritrovata di due Nobili Amanti, written in 1524 and published posthumously in 1531 in
Venice.
[14][15] Da Porto drew on Pyramus and Thisbe, Boccaccio's Decameron, and Salernitano's Mariotto e
Ganozza, but it is likely that his story is also autobiographical: present as a soldier at a ball on 26 February
1511, at a residence of the Savorgnan clan in Udine, following a peace ceremony with the opposite Strumieri,
Da Porto fell in love with Lucina, the daughter of the house, but relationships of their mentors prevented
advances. The next morning, the Savorgnans led an attack on the city, and many members of the Strumieri
were murdered. When years later, half-paralyzed from a battle-wound, he wrote Giulietta e Romeo in
Montorso Vicentino (from where he could see the "castles" of Verona), he dedicated the novella to bellisima e
leggiadra madonna Lucina Savorgnan.[13][16] Da Porto presented his tale as historically true and claimed it
took place at least a century earlier than Salernitano had it, in the days Verona was ruled by Bartolomeo della
Scala
[17]
 (anglicized as Prince Escalus).
Da Porto gave Romeo and Juliet most of its modern form, including the names of the lovers, the rival families
of Montecchi and Capuleti, and the location in Verona.
[10] He named the friar Laurence (frate Lorenzo) and
introduced the characters Mercutio (Marcuccio Guertio), Tybalt (Tebaldo Cappelleti), Count Paris (conti
(Paride) di Lodrone), the faithful servant, and Giulietta's nurse. Da Porto originated the remaining basic
elements of the story: the feuding families, Romeo—left by his mistress—meeting Giulietta at a dance at her
house, the love scenes (including the balcony scene), the periods of despair, Romeo killing Giulietta's cousin
(Tebaldo), and the families' reconciliation after the lovers' suicides.
[18]
In da Porto's version, Romeo takes
poison and Giulietta stabs herself with his dagger.
[19]
In 1554, Matteo Bandello published the second volume of his Novelle, which included his version of Giuletta
e Romeo,
[15] probably written between 1531 and 1545. Bandello lengthened and weighed down the plot
while leaving the storyline basically unchanged (though he did introduce Benvolio).
[18] Bandello's story was
translated into French by Pierre Boaistuau in 1559 in the first volume of his Histories Tragiques. Boaistuau
adds much moralising and sentiment, and the characters indulge in rhetorical outbursts.
[20]
In his 1562 narrative poem The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet, Arthur Brooke translated Boaistuau
faithfully but adjusted it to reflect parts of Chaucer's Troilus and Criseyde.
[21]
 There was a trend among writers
and playwrights to publish works based on Italian novelle—Italian tales were very popular among theatregoers—and Shakespeare may well have been familiar with William Painter's 1567 collection of Italian tales
titled Palace of Pleasure.
[22] This collection included a version in prose of the Romeo and Juliet story named
"The goodly History of the true and constant love of Romeo and Juliett". Shakespeare took advantage of this
popularity: The Merchant of Venice, Much Ado About Nothing, All's Well That Ends Well, Measure for
Measure, and Romeo and Juliet are all from Italian novelle. Romeo and Juliet is a dramatisation of Brooke's
translation, and Shakespeare follows the poem closely but adds extra detail to both major and minor characters
(the Nurse and Mercutio in particular).
[23][24][25]
Title page of the first edition
The title page from the First Folio, printed in 1623
Christopher Marlowe's Hero and Leander and Dido, Queen of Carthage, both similar stories written in
Shakespeare's day, are thought to be less of a direct influence, although they may have helped create an
atmosphere in which tragic love stories could thrive.
[21]
It is unknown when exactly Shakespeare wrote Romeo and Juliet.
Juliet's Nurse refers to an earthquake she says occurred 11 years
ago.[26] This may refer to the Dover Straits earthquake of 1580,
which would date that particular line to 1591. Other earthquakes—
both in England and in Verona—have been proposed in support of the
different dates.
[27] But the play's stylistic similarities with A
Midsummer Night's Dream and other plays conventionally dated
around 1594–95, place its composition sometime between 1591 and
1595.[28][b] One conjecture is that Shakespeare may have begun a
draft in 1591, which he completed in 1595.[29]
Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet was published in two quarto editions
prior to the publication of the First Folio of 1623. These are referred
to as Q1 and Q2. The first printed edition, Q1, appeared in early
1597, printed by John Danter. Because its text contains numerous
differences from the later editions, it is labelled a so-called 'bad
quarto'; the 20th-century editor T. J. B. Spencer described it as "a
detestable text, probably a reconstruction of the play from the
imperfect memories of one or two of the actors", suggesting that it had
been pirated for publication.[30] An alternative explanation for Q1's
shortcomings is that the play (like many others of the time) may have
been heavily edited before performance by the playing company.
[31]
However, "the theory, formulated by [Alfred] Pollard," that the 'bad quarto' was "reconstructed from memory
by some of the actors is now under attack. Alternative theories are that some or all of 'the bad quartos' are early
versions by Shakespeare or abbreviations made either for Shakespeare's company or for other companies."[32]
In any event, its appearance in early 1597 makes 1596 the latest possible date for the play's composition.[27]
The superior Q2 called the play The Most
Excellent and Lamentable Tragedie of
Romeo and Juliet. It was printed in 1599
by Thomas Creede and published by
Cuthbert Burby. Q2 is about 800 lines
longer than Q1.[31]
Its title page
describes it as "Newly corrected,
augmented and amended". Scholars
believe that Q2 was based on
Shakespeare's pre-performance draft
(called his foul papers) since there are
textual oddities such as variable tags for
characters and "false starts" for speeches
that were presumably struck through by
the author but erroneously preserved by
the typesetter. It is a much more complete
and reliable text and was reprinted in
1609 (Q3), 1622 (Q4) and 1637
Date and text
"Romeo
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Juliet
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too
much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do
touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss."
—Romeo and Juliet, Act I, Scene V[38]
(Q5).
[30]
 In effect, all later Quartos and Folios of Romeo and Juliet are based on Q2, as are all modern editions
since editors believe that any deviations from Q2 in the later editions (whether good or bad) are likely to have
arisen from editors or compositors, not from Shakespeare.
[31]
The First Folio text of 1623 was based primarily on Q3, with clarifications and corrections possibly coming
from a theatrical prompt book or Q1.[30][33] Other Folio editions of the play were printed in 1632 (F2), 1664
(F3), and 1685 (F4).
[34] Modern versions—that take into account several of the Folios and Quartos—first
appeared with Nicholas Rowe's 1709 edition, followed by Alexander Pope's 1723 version. Pope began a
tradition of editing the play to add information such as stage directions missing in Q2 by locating them in Q1.
This tradition continued late into the Romantic period. Fully annotated editions first appeared in the Victorian
period and continue to be produced today, printing the text of the play with footnotes describing the sources
and culture behind the play.
[35]

Romeo and Juliet is sometimes considered to have no
unifying theme, save that of young love.
[36]
 Romeo and
Juliet have become emblematic of young lovers and
doomed love. Since it is such an obvious subject of the
play, several scholars have explored the language and
historical context behind the romance of the play.
[39]
On their first meeting, Romeo and Juliet use a form of
communication recommended by many etiquette
authors in Shakespeare's day: metaphor. By using
metaphors of saints and sins, Romeo was able to test
Juliet's feelings for him in a non-threatening way. This
method was recommended by Baldassare Castiglione
(whose works had been translated into English by this
time). He pointed out that if a man used a metaphor as
an invitation, the woman could pretend she did not
understand him, and he could retreat without losing
honour. Juliet, however, participates in the metaphor
and expands on it. The religious metaphors of "shrine", "pilgrim", and "saint" were fashionable in the poetry
of the time and more likely to be understood as romantic rather than blasphemous, as the concept of sainthood
was associated with the Catholicism of an earlier age.
[40] Later in the play, Shakespeare removes the more
daring allusions to Christ's resurrection in the tomb he found in his source work: Brooke's Romeus and
Juliet.
[41]
In the later balcony scene, Shakespeare has Romeo overhear Juliet's soliloquy, but in Brooke's version of the
story, her declaration is done alone. By bringing Romeo into the scene to eavesdrop, Shakespeare breaks from
the normal sequence of courtship. Usually, a woman was required to be modest and shy to make sure that her
Themes and motifs
Love
Watercolor by John Masey Wright of
Act II, Scene ii (the balcony scene).
"O, I am fortune's fool!"
—Romeo, Act III Scene I[46]
"O brawling love, O loving hate,
O any thing of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick
health,
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!"
suitor was sincere, but breaking this rule serves to speed along the
plot. The lovers are able to skip courting and move on to plain talk
about their relationship—agreeing to be married after knowing each
other for only one night.
[39]
In the final suicide scene, there is a
contradiction in the message—in the Catholic religion, suicides were
often thought to be condemned to Hell, whereas people who die to be
with their loves under the "Religion of Love" are joined with their
loves in Paradise. Romeo and Juliet's love seems to be expressing the
"Religion of Love" view rather than the Catholic view. Another point
is that, although their love is passionate, it is only consummated in
marriage, which keeps them from losing the audience's sympathy.
[42]
The play arguably equates love and sex with death. Throughout the
story, both Romeo and Juliet, along with the other characters,
fantasise about it as a dark being, often equating it with a lover.
Capulet, for example, when he first discovers Juliet's (faked) death,
describes it as having deflowered his daughter.
[43] Juliet later
erotically compares Romeo and death. Right before her suicide, she
grabs Romeo's dagger, saying "O happy dagger! This is thy sheath.
There rust, and let me die."[44][45]
Scholars are divided on the role of fate in the play. No
consensus exists on whether the characters are truly
fated to die together or whether the events take place by
a series of unlucky chances. Arguments in favour of
fate often refer to the description of the lovers as "starcross'd". This phrase seems to hint that the stars have
predetermined the lovers' future.
[47] John W. Draper points out the parallels between the Elizabethan belief in
the four humours and the main characters of the play (for example, Tybalt as a choleric). Interpreting the text in
the light of humours reduces the amount of plot attributed to chance by modern audiences.
[48] Still, other
scholars see the play as a series of unlucky chances—many to such a degree that they do not see it as a tragedy
at all, but an emotional melodrama.
[48] Ruth Nevo believes the high degree to which chance is stressed in the
narrative makes Romeo and Juliet a "lesser tragedy" of happenstance, not of character. For example, Romeo's
challenging Tybalt is not impulsive; it is, after Mercutio's death, the expected action to take. In this scene,
Nevo reads Romeo as being aware of the dangers of flouting social norms, identity, and commitments. He
makes the choice to kill, not because of a tragic flaw, but because of circumstance.
[49]
Scholars have long noted Shakespeare's widespread use
of light and dark imagery throughout the play. Caroline
Spurgeon considers the theme of light as "symbolic of
the natural beauty of young love" and later critics have
expanded on this interpretation.[49][51] For example,
both Romeo and Juliet see the other as light in a
surrounding darkness. Romeo describes Juliet as being
like the sun,[52] brighter than a torch,[53] a jewel
sparkling in the night,
[54] and a bright angel among
Fate and chance
Duality (light and dark)
—Romeo, Act I, Scene I[50]
"These times of woe afford no time to woo."
—Paris, Act III Scene IV
[60]
dark clouds.
[55] Even when she lies apparently dead in
the tomb, he says her "beauty makes This vault a
feasting presence full of light."[56] Juliet describes
Romeo as "day in night" and "Whiter than snow upon a
raven's back."[57][58] This contrast of light and dark can be expanded as symbols—contrasting love and hate,
youth and age in a metaphoric way.
[49] Sometimes these intertwining metaphors create dramatic irony. For
example, Romeo and Juliet's love is a light in the midst of the darkness of the hate around them, but all of their
activity together is done in night and darkness while all of the feuding is done in broad daylight. This paradox
of imagery adds atmosphere to the moral dilemma facing the two lovers: loyalty to family or loyalty to love. At
the end of the story, when the morning is gloomy and the sun hiding its face for sorrow, light and dark have
returned to their proper places, the outward darkness reflecting the true, inner darkness of the family feud out
of sorrow for the lovers. All characters now recognise their folly in light of recent events, and things return to
the natural order, thanks to the love and death of Romeo and Juliet.
[51] The "light" theme in the play is also
heavily connected to the theme of time since light was a convenient way for Shakespeare to express the
passage of time through descriptions of the sun, moon, and stars.
[59]

The earliest known critic of the play was diarist Samuel Pepys, who
wrote in 1662: "it is a play of itself the worst that I ever heard in my
life."[68] Poet John Dryden wrote 10 years later in praise of the play
and its comic character Mercutio: "Shakespear show'd the best of his
skill in his Mercutio, and he said himself, that he was forc'd to kill him
in the third Act, to prevent being killed by him."[68] Criticism of the
play in the 18th century was less sparse but no less divided. Publisher
Nicholas Rowe was the first critic to ponder the theme of the play,
which he saw as the just punishment of the two feuding families. In
mid-century, writer Charles Gildon and philosopher Lord Kames
argued that the play was a failure in that it did not follow the classical
rules of drama: the tragedy must occur because of some character
flaw, not an accident of fate. Writer and critic Samuel Johnson,
however, considered it one of Shakespeare's "most pleasing"
plays.
[69]
