Carmen (French: [kaʁ.mɛn]) is an opera in four acts by
French composer Georges Bizet. The libretto was written
by Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy, based on a novella
of the same title by Prosper Mérimée. The opera was first
performed by the Opéra-Comique in Paris on 3 March
1875, where its breaking of conventions shocked and
scandalized its first audiences.
Bizet died suddenly after the 33rd performance, unaware
that the work would achieve international acclaim within
the following ten years. Carmen has since become one of
the most popular and frequently performed operas in the
classical canon; the "Habanera" from act 1 and the
"Toreador Song" from act 2 are among the best known of
all operatic arias.
The opera is written in the genre of opéra comique with
musical numbers separated by dialogue. It is set in
southern Spain and tells the story of the downfall of Don
José, a naïve soldier who is seduced by the wiles of the
fiery gypsy Carmen. José abandons his childhood
sweetheart and deserts from his military duties, yet loses
Carmen's love to the glamorous torero Escamillo, after
which José kills her in a jealous rage. The depictions of
proletarian life, immorality, and lawlessness, and the tragic
death of the main character on stage, broke new ground in
French opera and were highly controversial.
After the premiere, most reviews were critical, and the
French public was generally indifferent. Carmen initially
gained its reputation through a series of productions
outside France, and was not revived in Paris until 1883.
Thereafter, it rapidly acquired popularity at home and
abroad. Later commentators have asserted that Carmen
forms the bridge between the tradition of opéra comique
and the realism or verismo that characterised late 19thcentury Italian opera.
The music of Carmen has since been widely acclaimed for brilliance of melody, harmony, atmosphere, and
orchestration, and for the skill with which Bizet musically represented the emotions and suffering of his
characters. After the composer's death, the score was subject to significant amendment, including the
introduction of recitative in place of the original dialogue; there is no standard edition of the opera, and
different views exist as to what versions best express Bizet's intentions. The opera has been recorded many
times since the first acoustical recording in 1908, and the story has been the subject of many screen and stage
adaptations
In the Paris of the 1860s, despite being a Prix de Rome laureate, Bizet struggled to get his stage works
performed. The capital's two main state-funded opera houses—the Opéra and the Opéra-Comique—followed
conservative repertoires that restricted opportunities for young native talent.
[1] Bizet's professional relationship
with Léon Carvalho, manager of the independent Théâtre Lyrique company, enabled him to bring to the stage
two full-scale operas, Les pêcheurs de perles (1863) and La jolie fille de Perth (1867), but neither enjoyed
much public success.
[2][3]
When artistic life in Paris resumed after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, Bizet found wider opportunities
for the performance of his works; his one-act opera Djamileh opened at the Opéra-Comique in May 1872.
Although this failed and was withdrawn after 11 performances,
[4]
it led to a further commission from the
theatre, this time for a full-length opera for which Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy would provide the
libretto.[5] Halévy, who had written the text for Bizet's student opera Le docteur Miracle (1856), was a cousin
of Bizet's wife, Geneviève;
[6] he and Meilhac had a solid reputation as the librettists of many of Jacques
Offenbach's operettas.
[7]
Bizet was delighted with the Opéra-Comique commission, and expressed to
his friend Edmund Galabert his satisfaction in "the absolute certainty of
having found my path".
[5] The subject of the projected work was a matter of
discussion between composer, librettists and the Opéra-Comique
management; Adolphe de Leuven, on behalf of the theatre, made several
suggestions that were politely rejected. It was Bizet who first proposed an
adaptation of Prosper Mérimée's novella Carmen.
[8] Mérimée's story is a
blend of travelogue and adventure yarn, possibly inspired by the writer's
lengthy travels in Spain in 1830, and had originally been published in 1845 in
the journal Revue des deux Mondes.
[9]
It may have been influenced in part by
Alexander Pushkin's 1824 poem "The Gypsies",
[10] a work Mérimée had
translated into French;[n 1]
it has also been suggested that the story was
developed from an incident told to Mérimée by his friend the Countess
Montijo.[9] Bizet may first have encountered the story during his Rome
sojourn of 1858–60, since his journals record Mérimée as one of the writers
whose works he absorbed in those years.
[12]

A square, in Seville. On the right, a door to the tobacco factory. At the back, a bridge. On the left, a
guardhouse.
A group of soldiers relax in the square, waiting for the changing of the guard and commenting on the passersby ("Sur la place, chacun passe"). Micaëla appears, seeking José. Moralès tells her that "José is not yet on
duty" and invites her to wait with them. She declines, saying she will return later. José arrives with the new
guard, who is greeted and imitated by a crowd of urchins ("Avec la garde montante").
As the factory bell rings, the cigarette girls emerge and
exchange banter with young men in the crowd ("La
cloche a sonné"). Carmen enters and sings her
provocative habanera on the untameable nature of love
("L'amour est un oiseau rebelle"). The men plead with
her to choose a lover, and after some teasing she throws a
flower to Don José, who thus far has been ignoring her
but is now annoyed by her insolence.
As the women go back to the factory, Micaëla returns
and gives José a letter and a kiss from his mother ("Parlemoi de ma mère!"). He reads that his mother wants him
to return home and marry Micaëla, who retreats in shy
embarrassment on learning this. Just as José declares that
he is ready to heed his mother's wishes, the women
stream from the factory in great agitation. Zuniga, the
officer of the guard, learns that Carmen has attacked a woman with a knife. When challenged, Carmen
answers with mocking defiance ("Tra la la ... Coupe-moi, brûle-moi"); Zuniga orders José to tie her hands
while he prepares the prison warrant. Left alone with José, Carmen beguiles him with a seguidilla, in which
she sings of a night of dancing and passion with her lover—whoever that may be—in Lillas Pastia's tavern.
Confused yet mesmerised, José agrees to free her hands; as she is led away she pushes her escort to the ground
and runs off laughing. José is arrested for dereliction of duty
A square, in Seville. On the right, a door to the tobacco factory. At the back, a bridge. On the left, a
guardhouse.
A group of soldiers relax in the square, waiting for the changing of the guard and commenting on the passersby ("Sur la place, chacun passe"). Micaëla appears, seeking José. Moralès tells her that "José is not yet on
duty" and invites her to wait with them. She declines, saying she will return later. José arrives with the new
guard, who is greeted and imitated by a crowd of urchins ("Avec la garde montante").
As the factory bell rings, the cigarette girls emerge and
exchange banter with young men in the crowd ("La
cloche a sonné"). Carmen enters and sings her
provocative habanera on the untameable nature of love
("L'amour est un oiseau rebelle"). The men plead with
her to choose a lover, and after some teasing she throws a
flower to Don José, who thus far has been ignoring her
but is now annoyed by her insolence.
As the women go back to the factory, Micaëla returns
and gives José a letter and a kiss from his mother ("Parlemoi de ma mère!"). He reads that his mother wants him
to return home and marry Micaëla, who retreats in shy
embarrassment on learning this. Just as José declares that
he is ready to heed his mother's wishes, the women
stream from the factory in great agitation. Zuniga, the
officer of the guard, learns that Carmen has attacked a woman with a knife. When challenged, Carmen
answers with mocking defiance ("Tra la la ... Coupe-moi, brûle-moi"); Zuniga orders José to tie her hands
while he prepares the prison warrant. Left alone with José, Carmen beguiles him with a seguidilla, in which
she sings of a night of dancing and passion with her lover—whoever that may be—in Lillas Pastia's tavern.
Confused yet mesmerised, José agrees to free her hands; as she is led away she pushes her escort to the ground
and runs off laughing. José is arrested for dereliction of duty
Premiere and initial run
virtue;
[53] Galli-Marié's interpretation of the role was described by one critic as "the very incarnation of
vice".
[52] Others compared the work unfavourably with the traditional Opéra-Comique repertoire of Auber
and Boieldieu. Léon Escudier in L'Art Musical called Carmen's music "dull and obscure ... the ear grows
weary of waiting for the cadence that never comes."[54]
It seemed that Bizet had generally failed to fulfill
expectations, both of those who (given Halévy's and Meilhac's past associations) had expected something in
the Offenbach mould, and of critics such as Adolphe Jullien who had anticipated a Wagnerian music drama.
Among the few supportive critics was the poet Théodore de Banville; writing in Le National, he applauded
Bizet for presenting a drama with real men and women instead of the usual Opéra-Comique "puppets".
[55]
In its initial run at the Opéra-Comique, Carmen provoked little public enthusiasm; it shared the theatre for a
while with Verdi's much more popular Requiem.
[56] Carmen was often performed to half-empty houses, even
when the management gave away large numbers of tickets.
[23] Early on 3 June, the day after the opera's 33rd
performance, Bizet died suddenly of heart disease, at the age of 36. It was his wedding anniversary. That
night's performance was cancelled; the tragic circumstances brought a temporary increase in public interest
during the brief period before the season ended.[17] Du Locle brought Carmen back in November 1875, with
the original cast, and it ran for a further 12 performances until 15 February 1876 to give a year's total for the
original production of 48.[57] Among those who attended one of these later performances was Tchaikovsky,
who wrote to his benefactor, Nadezhda von Meck: "Carmen is a masterpiece in every sense of the word ...
one of those rare creations which expresses the efforts of a whole musical epoch."[58] After the final
performance, Carmen was not seen in Paris again until 1883.[23]
Shortly before his death Bizet signed a contract for a production of Carmen by the Vienna Court Opera. For
this version, first staged on 23 October 1875, Bizet's friend Ernest Guiraud replaced the original dialogue with
recitatives, to create a "grand opera" format. Guiraud also reorchestrated music from Bizet's L'Arlésienne suite
to provide a spectacular ballet for Carmen's second act.
[59] Shortly before the initial Vienna performance, the
Court Opera's director Franz von Jauner decided to use parts of the original dialogue along with some of
Guiraud's recitatives; this hybrid and the full recitative version became the norms for productions of the opera
outside France for most of the next century.
[60]
Despite its deviations from Bizet's original format, and some critical reservations, the 1875 Vienna production
was a great success with the city's public. It also won praise from both Wagner and Brahms. The latter
reportedly saw the opera twenty times, and said he would have "gone to the ends of the earth to embrace
Bizet".
[59] The Viennese triumph began the opera's rapid ascent towards worldwide fame. In February 1876 it
began a run in Brussels at La Monnaie; it returned there the following year, with Galli-Marié in the title role,
and thereafter became a permanent fixture in the Brussels repertory. On 17 June 1878 Carmen was produced
in London, at Her Majesty's Theatre, where Minnie Hauk began her long association with the part of Carmen.
A parallel London production at Covent Garden, with Adelina Patti, was cancelled when Patti withdrew. The
successful Her Majesty's production, sung in Italian, had an equally enthusiastic reception in Dublin. On 23
October 1878 the opera received its American premiere, at the New York Academy of Music, and in the same
year was introduced to Saint Petersburg.
[57]
In the following five years performances were given in numerous American and European cities. The opera
found particular favour in Germany, where the Chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, apparently saw it on 27
different occasions and where Friedrich Nietzsche opined that he "became a better man when Bizet speaks to
me".
[61][62] Carmen was also acclaimed in numerous French provincial cities including Marseille, Lyon and,
in 1881, Dieppe, where Galli-Marié returned to the role. In August 1881 the singer wrote to Bizet's widow to
report that Carmen's Spanish premiere, in Barcelona, had been "another great success".
[63] But Carvalho,
who had assumed the management of the Opéra-Comique, thought the work immoral and refused to reinstate
Early revivals
Many distinguished artistes sang the
role of Carmen in early productions
of the opera.
Carmen at the New York Met in
1915; a publicity photograph that
shows the three principal stars:
Geraldine Farrar, Enrico Caruso and
Pasquale Amato
it. Meilhac and Hálevy were more prepared to countenance a revival,
provided that Galli-Marié had no part in it; they blamed her
interpretation for the relative failure of the opening run.[62]
In April 1883 Carvalho finally revived Carmen at the OpéraComique, with Adèle Isaac featuring in an under-rehearsed
production that removed some of the controversial aspects of the
original. Carvalho was roundly condemned by the critics for offering
a travesty of what had come to be regarded as a masterpiece of French
opera; nevertheless, this version was acclaimed by the public and
played to full houses. In October Carvalho yielded to pressure and
revised the production; he brought back Galli-Marié, and restored the
score and libretto to their 1875 forms.
[64]
On 9 January 1884, Carmen
was given its first New York
Metropolitan Opera
performance, to a mixed
critical reception. The New
York Times welcomed Bizet's
"pretty and effective work", but compared Zelia Trebelli's
interpretation of the title role unfavourably with that of Minnie
Hauk.[65] Thereafter Carmen was quickly incorporated into the Met's
regular repertory. In February 1906 Enrico Caruso sang José at the
Met for the first time; he continued to perform in this role until 1919,
two years before his death.[65] On 17 April 1906, on tour with the
Met, he sang the role at the Grand Opera House in San Francisco.
Afterwards he sat up until 3 am reading the reviews in the early
editions of the following day's papers.
[66] Two hours later he was
awakened by the first violent shocks of the 1906 San Francisco
earthquake, after which he and his fellow performers made a hurried
escape from the Palace Hotel.
[67]
The popularity of Carmen continued through succeeding generations
of American opera-goers; by the beginning of 2011 the Met alone had
performed it almost a thousand times.
[65]
It enjoyed similar success in
other American cities and in all parts of the world, in many different
languages.
[68] Carmen's habanera from act 1, and the toreador's song
"Votre toast" from act 2, are among the most popular and best-known of all operatic arias,
[69]
the latter "a
splendid piece of swagger" according to Newman, "against which the voices and the eyebrows of purists have
long been raised in vain".
[70] Most of the productions outside France followed the example created in Vienna
and incorporated lavish ballet interludes and other spectacles, a practice which Mahler abandoned in Vienna
when he revived the work there in 1900.[49]
In 1919, Bizet's aged contemporary Camille Saint-Saëns was still
complaining about the "strange idea" of adding a ballet, which he considered "a hideous blemish in that
masterpiece", and he wondered why Bizet's wife had permitted it.
[71]
At the Opéra-Comique, after its 1883 revival, Carmen was always presented in the dialogue version with
minimal musical embellishments.
[72] By 1888, the year of the 50th anniversary of Bizet's birth, the opera had
been performed there 330 times;
[68] by 1938, his centenary year, the total of performances at the theatre had
Worldwide success
reached 2,271.[73] However, outside France the practice of using recitatives remained the norm for many
years; the Carl Rosa Opera Company's 1947 London production, and Walter Felsenstein's 1949 staging at the
Berlin Komische Oper, are among the first known instances in which the dialogue version was used other than
in France.
[72][74] Neither of these innovations led to much change in practice; a similar experiment was tried at
Covent Garden in 1953 but hurriedly withdrawn, and the first American production with spoken dialogue, in
Colorado in 1953, met with a similar fate.
[72]
Dean has commented on the dramatic distortions that arise from the suppression of the dialogue; the effect, he
says, is that the action moves forward "in a series of jerks, rather instead of by smooth transition", and that
most of the minor characters are substantially diminished.[72][75] Only late in the 20th century did dialogue
versions become common in opera houses outside France, but there is still no universally recognised full score.
Fritz Oeser's 1964 edition is an attempt to fill this gap, but in Dean's view is unsatisfactory. Oeser reintroduces
material removed by Bizet during the first rehearsals, and ignores many of the late changes and improvements
that the composer made immediately before the first performance;
[23] he thus, according to Susan McClary,
"inadvertently preserves as definitive an early draft of the opera".
[27]
In the early 21st century new editions
were prepared by Robert Didion and Richard Langham-Smith, published by Schott and Peters
respectively.
[76] Each departs significantly from Bizet's vocal score of March 1875, published during his
lifetime after he had personally corrected the proofs; Dean believes this vocal score should be the basis of any
standard edition.[23]
 Lesley Wright, a contemporary Bizet scholar, remarks that, unlike his compatriots Rameau
and Debussy, Bizet has not been accorded a critical edition of his principal works;
[77]
 should this transpire, she
says, "we might expect yet another scholar to attempt to refine the details of this vibrant score which has so
fascinated the public and performers for more than a century."[76] Meanwhile, Carmen's popularity endures;
according to Macdonald: "The memorability of Bizet's tunes will keep the music of Carmen alive in
perpetuity," and its status as a popular classic is unchallenged by any other French opera.
[36] A 2018
performance at the Teatro Comunale, Florence, changed the ending to take a stand against violence against
women. Instead of being killed, Carmen kills Don José with a pistol she grabs from him.
[78] Many applauded
the change, seeing it as way to break the tradition of representing misogyny in opera while so many women
continue to suffer from violence and abuse.
[79]
Hervé Lacombe, in his survey of 19th-century French opera, contends that Carmen is one of the few works
from that large repertory to have stood the test of time.
[80] While he places the opera firmly within the long
opéra comique tradition,[81] Macdonald considers that it transcends the genre and that its immortality is
assured by "the combination in abundance of striking melody, deft harmony and perfectly judged
orchestration".
[17] Dean sees Bizet's principal achievement in the demonstration of the main actions of the
opera in the music, rather than in the dialogue, writing that "Few artists have expressed so vividly the torments
inflicted by sexual passions and jealousy." Dean places Bizet's realism in a different category from the verismo
of Puccini and others; he likens the composer to Mozart and Verdi in his ability to engage his audiences with
the emotions and sufferings of his characters.
[23]
Bizet, who had never visited Spain, sought out appropriate ethnic material to provide an authentic Spanish
flavour to his music.
[23] Carmen's habanera is based on an idiomatic song, "El Arreglito", by the Spanish
composer Sebastián Yradier (1809–65).
[n 4] Bizet had taken this to be a genuine folk melody; when he learned
its recent origin he added a note to the vocal score, crediting Yradier.
[83] He used a genuine folksong as the
source of Carmen's defiant "Coupe-moi, brûle-moi" while other parts of the score, notably the "Seguidilla",
utilise the rhythms and instrumentation associated with flamenco music. However, Dean insists that "[t]his is a
French, not a Spanish opera"; the "foreign bodies", while they undoubtedly contribute to the unique
atmosphere of the opera, form only a small ingredient of the complete music.
[82]
The prelude to act 1 combines three recurrent themes: the entry of the
bullfighters from act 4, the refrain from the Toreador Song from act 2,
and the motif that, in two slightly differing forms, represents both
Carmen herself and the fate she personifies.
[n 5] This motif, played on
clarinet, bassoon, cornet and cellos over tremolo strings, concludes the
prelude with an abrupt crescendo.[82][84] When the curtain rises a
light and sunny atmosphere is soon established, and pervades the
opening scenes. The mock solemnities of the changing of the guard,
and the flirtatious exchanges between the townsfolk and the factory
girls, precede a mood change when a brief phrase from the fate motif
announces Carmen's entrance. After her provocative habanera, with
its persistent insidious rhythm and changes of key, the fate motif
sounds in full when Carmen throws her flower to José before departing.[85] This action elicits from José a
passionate A major solo which Dean suggests is the turning-point in his musical characterisation.
[31] The
softer vein returns briefly, as Micaëla reappears and joins with José in a duet to a warm clarinet and strings
accompaniment. The tranquillity is shattered by the women's noisy quarrel, Carmen's dramatic re-entry and her
defiant interaction with Zuniga. After her beguiling "Seguidilla" provokes José to an exasperated high A sharp
shout, Carmen's escape is preceded by the brief but disconcerting reprise of a fragment from the
habanera.
[82][86]
 Bizet revised this finale several times to increase its dramatic effect.
[27]
Act 2 begins with a short prelude, based on a melody that José will sing offstage before his next entry.
[31] A
festive scene in the inn precedes Escamillo's tumultuous entrance, in which brass and percussion provide
prominent backing while the crowd sings along.[87] The quintet that follows is described by Newman as "of
incomparable verve and musical wit".
[88] José's appearance precipitates a long mutual wooing scene; Carmen
sings, dances and plays the castanets; a distant cornet-call summoning José to duty is blended with Carmen's
melody so as to be barely discernible.
[89] A muted reference to the fate motif on an English horn leads to
José's "Flower Song", a flowing continuous melody that ends pianissimo on a sustained high B-flat.
[90] José's
insistence that, despite Carmen's blandishments, he must return to duty leads to a quarrel; the arrival of Zuniga,
the consequent fight and José's unavoidable ensnarement into the lawless life culminates musically in the
triumphant hymn to freedom that closes the act.
[91]
The prelude to act 3 was originally intended for Bizet's L'Arlésienne score. Newman describes it as "an
exquisite miniature, with much dialoguing and intertwining between the woodwind instruments".
[92] As the
action unfolds, the tension between Carmen and José is evident in the music. In the card scene, the lively duet
for Frasquita and Mercédès turns ominous when Carmen intervenes; the fate motif underlines her premonition
of death. Micaëla's aria, after her entry in search of José, is a conventional piece, though of deep feeling,
preceded and concluded by horn calls.
[93] The middle part of the act is occupied by Escamillo and José, now
acknowledged as rivals for Carmen's favour. The music reflects their contrasting attitudes: Escamillo remains,
says Newman, "invincibly polite and ironic", while José is sullen and aggressive.
[94] When Micaëla pleads
with José to go with her to his mother, the harshness of Carmen's music reveals her most unsympathetic side.
As José departs, vowing to return, the fate theme is heard briefly in the woodwind.[95]
 The confident, off-stage
sound of the departing Escamillo singing the toreador's refrain provides a distinct contrast to José's increasing
desperation.[96]
The final act is prefaced with a lively orchestral piece derived from Manuel García's short operetta El Criado
Fingido.
[82] After the opening crowd scene, the bullfighters' march is led by the children's chorus; the crowd
hails Escamillo before his short love scene with Carmen.[97] The long finale, in which José makes his last
pleas to Carmen and is decisively rejected, is punctuated at critical moments by enthusiastic off-stage shouts
from the bullfighting arena. As José kills Carmen, the chorus sing the refrain of the Toreador Song off-stage;
the fate motif, which has been suggestively present at various points during the act, is heard fortissimo,
together with a brief reference to Carmen's card scene music.
[27] Jose's last words of love and despair are
followed by a final long chord, on which the curtain falls without further musical or vocal comment.
[98]
In 1883, the Spanish violinist and composer Pablo de Sarasate (1844–1908) wrote a Carmen Fantasy for
violin, described as "ingenious and technically difficult".
[104] Ferruccio Busoni's 1920 piece, Piano Sonatina
No. 6 (Fantasia da camera super Carmen), is based on themes from Carmen.
[105]
In 1967, the Russian
composer Rodion Shchedrin adapted parts of the Carmen music into a ballet, the Carmen Suite, written for his
wife Maya Plisetskaya, then the Bolshoi Ballet's principal ballerina.
[106][107]
In 1983 the stage director Peter Brook produced an adaptation of Bizet's opera known as La Tragedie de
Carmen in collaboration with the writer Jean-Claude Carrière and the composer Marius Constant. This 90-
minute version focused on four main characters, eliminating choruses and the major arias were reworked for
chamber orchestra. Brook first produced it in Paris, and it has since been performed in many cities.
[108]
The character "Carmen" has been a regular subject of film treatment since the
earliest days of cinema. The films were made in various languages and
interpreted by several cultures, and have been created by prominent directors
including Gerolamo Lo Savio (1909), Raoul Walsh (1915) with Theda
Bara,
[109] Cecil B. DeMille (1915),
[110] and The Loves of Carmen (1948)
with Rita Hayworth and Glenn Ford, directed by Charles Vidor. Otto
Preminger's 1954 Carmen Jones, with an all-black cast, is based on the 1943
Oscar Hammerstein Broadway musical of the same name, an adaptation of
the opera transposed to 1940s' North Carolina extending to Chicago.[111] The
Wild, Wild Rose is a 1960 Hong Kong film which adapts the plot and main
character to the setting of a Wanchai nightclub, including striking renditions of
some of the most famous songs by Grace Chang.
[112][113] Other adaptions
include Carlos Saura (1983) (who made a flamenco-based dance film with
two levels of story telling), Peter Brook (1983) (filming his compressed La
Tragédie de Carmen) and Jean-Luc Godard (1984).
[114][115] Francesco
Rosi's film of 1984, with Julia Migenes and Plácido Domingo, is generally
faithful to the original story and to Bizet's music.
[114] Carmen on Ice (1990),
starring Katarina Witt, Brian Boitano and Brian Orser, was inspired by Witt's
gold medal-winning performance during the 1988 Winter Olympics.
[116]
Robert Townsend's 2001 film, Carmen: A Hip Hopera, starring Beyoncé
Knowles, is a more recent attempt to create an African-American version.[117] Carmen was interpreted in
modern ballet by the South African dancer and choreographer Dada Masilo in 2010.[118]
