Stratford-upon-Avon (/-ˈeɪvən/), commonly known as just Stratford, is a
market town and civil parish in the Stratford-on-Avon district, in the county
of Warwickshire,
[3] England. It is situated on the River Avon, 91 miles
(146 km) north-west of London, 22 miles (35 km) south-east of Birmingham
and 8 miles (13 km) south-west of Warwick.
[4] The estimated population in
2007 was 25,505,[5]
increasing to 27,445 at the 2011 census. As of 2018,
(Source www.stratford.gov.uk) the population that resides in the Stratford
upon Avon district has reached a figure of 130,098.
Stratford was originally inhabited by Anglo-Saxons and remained a village
before the lord of the manor, John of Coutances, set out plans to develop it
into a town in 1196. In that same year, Stratford was granted a charter from
King Richard I to hold a weekly market in the town, giving it its status as a
market town. As a result, Stratford experienced an increase in trade and
commerce as well as urban expansion.
The town is a popular tourist destination owing to its status as the birthplace
and gravesite of playwright and poet William Shakespeare, and receives
approximately 2.5 million visitors a year.
[6] The Royal Shakespeare
Company resides in Stratford's Royal Shakespeare Theatre.
History
Origin of name
Early history
Modern history
Governance
Local government
Geography
Climate
Demography
Economy
Tourism
Shopping centres
Culture
Theatre
Filming and television
Music
Museums and Shakespeare's houses
Literature
Shakespeare's celebrations
Pubs
Streets
Henley Street
Stratfordupon-Avon
Contents
UK Parliament Stratford-onAvon
Sheep Street
Waterside and Southern Lane
Other attractions
Transport
Education
Sport
Churches
Notable people
See also
References
External links
The name is a combination of the Old English strǣt (from Latin stratum), meaning 'street', ford, indicating a shallow
part of a river or stream, allowing it to be crossed by walking or driving and avon which is the Celtic word for river.
[7][8]
The 'street' was a Roman road which connected Icknield Street in Alcester to the Fosse Way. The ford, which has been
used as a crossing since Roman times, later became the location of Clopton Bridge.
[9][10][11] A survey of 1251–52 uses
the name Stratford for the first time to identify Old Stratford and the newer manors.
[10][12] The name was used after that
time to describe the area specifically surrounding the Holy Trinity Church and the street of Old Town.[10]
The settlement which later became known as Stratford was first inhabited by Anglo-Saxons following their 7th-century
invasion of what would become known as Warwickshire.
[7][13] The land was owned by the church of Worcester and it
remained a village until the late 12th century when it was developed into a town by lord of the manor, John of
Coutances.
[10] John laid out a new town plan in 1196 based on a grid system to expand Stratford and allow people to
rent property in order to trade within the town.[7][11][14] Additionally, a charter was granted to Stratford by King
Richard I in 1196 which allowed a weekly market to be held in the town, giving it its status as a market town. These two
charters, which formed the foundations of Stratford's transformation from a village to a town, make the town of Stratford
over 800 years old.[11][15]
John's plans to develop Stratford into a town meant Stratford became a place of work for tradesmen and merchants.
[11]
By 1252 the town had approximately 240 burgages, as well as shops, stalls and other buildings.
[10] Stratford's new
workers established a guild known as the Guild of the Holy Cross for their business and religious requirements.
[11]
Many of the town's earliest and most important buildings are located along what is known as Stratford's Historic Spine,
which was once the main route from the town centre to the parish church. The route of the Historic Spine begins at
Shakespeare's Birthplace in Henley Street. It continues through Henley Street to the top end of Bridge Street and into
High Street where many Elizabethan buildings are located, including Harvard House. The route carries on through
Chapel Street where Nash's House and New Place are sited. The Historic Spine continues along Church Street where
Guild buildings are located dating back to the 15th century, as well as 18th- and 19th-century properties. The route then
finishes in Old Town, which includes Hall's Croft and the Holy Trinity Church.
[14]
During Stratford's early expansion into a town, the only access across the River Avon into and out of the town was over
a wooden bridge, thought to have been constructed in 1318. However, the bridge could not be crossed at times due to
the river rising and was described by antiquarian John Leland as "a poor bridge of timber and no causey [causeway] to
it, whereby many poor folks and other refused to come to Stratford when Avon was up, or coming thither stood in
jeopardy of life." In 1480, a new
masonry arch bridge was built to
replace it called Clopton Bridge,
named after Hugh Clopton who paid
for its construction. The new bridge
made it easier for people to trade within
Stratford and for passing travellers to
stay in the town.[10][16][17]
The Cotswolds, located close to
Stratford, was a major sheep-producing
area up until the latter part of the 19th
century, with Stratford one of its main
centres for the processing, marketing, and
distribution of sheep and wool. Consequently,
Stratford also became a centre for tanning
during the 15th–17th centuries.
[13] Both the river and the Roman road served as trade
routes for the town.
Despite Stratford's increase in trade, it barely grew between the middle of the 13th
century and the end of the 16th century, with a survey of the town showing 217 houses
belonged to the lord of the manor in 1590. Growth continued to be slow throughout the
17th century, with hearth tax returns showing that at most there were approximately 429
houses in the town by 1670. However, more substantial expansion began following
several enclosure acts in the late 18th century, with the first and largest development by
John Payton who developed land on the north side of the old town, creating several
streets including John Street and Payton Street.
[10][18]
Before the dominance of road and rail, Stratford was the gateway to the network of British canals.
[19]
In 1769, the actor David Garrick staged a major Shakespeare Jubilee over three days which saw the construction of a
large rotunda and the influx of many visitors. This contributed to the growing phenomenon of Bardolatry which made
Stratford a tourist destination.[20][21]
Apart from tourism, which is a major employer, especially in the hotel,
hospitality industry and catering sectors,
[41] other industries in the town include
boat building and maintenance, bicycles, (Pashley Cycles) mechanical and
electrical engineering, food manufacture, Information Technology, call centre
and service sector activities, a large motor sales sector, industrial plant hire,
building suppliers, market gardening, farming, storage and transport logistics,
finance and insurance, and a large retail sector.
Major employers in the town include the NFU Mutual Insurance Company
(and Avon Insurance), AMEC, Sitel, Tesco, Morrisons, Marks & Spencer, B &
Q and Pashley Cycles. There are, nominally, three theatres run by the
prestigious Royal Shakespeare Company, which attract large audiences and
income for the town.
The regular large influx of tourists is the major source of the town's
prosperity,
[41]
receiving between 2.5 million and 3 million visitors
annually.
[6][42] Stratford is a major English tourist town due to it being the
birthplace of William Shakespeare, whom many consider the greatest
playwright of all time.
[41][43]
In 2010 the District Council spent £298,000 on
tourism promotion[44] and supports an official open-top tour bus service. In
2010 Stratford-on-Avon District Council launched a re-branded official tourism
website for the Stratford area called Discover Stratford
[45] after opening a new
tourist information centre on Henley Street in May 2010,[46] which has since
moved back to the original location on Bridgefoot.
[47]
Apart from the town centre, Maybird Shopping Park, usually referred to locally as "The Maybird Centre" or simply
"The Maybird", is a large shopping centre situated on Birmingham Road, approximately a five-minute drive from the
town centre. The Rosebird Centre is a much smaller shopping centre located on Shipston Road, consisting of Waitrose,
a pet shop and a pharmacy/GP surgery.
The first real theatre in Stratford was a temporary wooden affair built in 1769 by the actor David Garrick for his
Shakespeare Jubilee celebrations of that year to mark Shakespeare's birthday. The theatre, built not far from the site of
the present Royal Shakespeare Theatre, was almost washed away in two days of torrential rain that resulted in terrible
flooding.[20][21]
To celebrate the 300th anniversary of Shakespeare's birth in 1864, brewer Charles Edward Flower instigated the
building of a temporary wooden theatre, known as the Tercentenary Theatre, which was built in a part of the brewer's
large gardens on what is today the site of the new, and temporary, Courtyard Theatre. After three months the
Tercentenary Theatre was dismantled, with the timber used for house-building
purposes.
[48]
In the early 1870s, Charles Flower gave several acres of riverside land to the
local council on the understanding that a permanent theatre be built in honour of
Shakespeare's memory, and by 1879 the first Shakespeare Memorial Theatre
had been completed. It proved to be a huge success, and by the early 20th
century was effectively being run by the actor/manager Frank Benson, later Sir
Frank Benson.[48] The theatre burned down in 1926, with the then artistic
director, William Bridges-Adams, moving all productions to the local cinema.
An architectural competition was arranged to elicit designs for a new theatre,
with the winner, English architect Elisabeth Scott, creating the Royal
Shakespeare Theatre we see on the riverside today. The new theatre, adjoining
what was left of the old theatre, was opened by the then Prince of Wales, later
Edward VIII, in 1932. The new theatre had many illustrious artistic directors, including the actor Anthony Quayle. Sir
Peter Hall was appointed artistic director (designate) in 1959, and formed the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) in
1961.
The RSC also runs two smaller theatres, the Swan Theatre, which was created
in the 1980s out of the shell of the remains of the original Memorial Theatre and
is modelled on an Elizabethan theatre, quickly becoming one of the finest acting
spaces in the UK, and The Other Place theatre. Along with the RST, the Swan
Theatre closed in 2007 for refurbishment and reopened in November 2010. The
Other Place, a Black box theatre, was extended to become the temporary RSC
Courtyard Theatre, opening in July 2006 and was the home of the RSC while
the RST was being refurbished – its interior is similar to the interior of the
refurbished RST. The Courtyard Theatre closed in 2015 and was replaced by
The Other Place in March 2016, which returned as a 200-seat studio theatre
within the steel extension in which the Courtyard Theatre was located.[49][50]
Stratford is also home to The Bear Pit Theatre which was founded in 2008 as a
voluntary organisation. It has 100 seats and is part of the Little Theatre Guild.
[51][52][53]
The Attic Theatre is Stratford-upon-Avon's premiere fringe theatre. Established by
husband-and-wife team John and Catherine Partridge in 2009, who also run the awardwinning Tread The Boards Theatre Company.
[54] The venue is located next door to
Cox's Yard and hosts an intimate 90-seat auditorium in the Grade 2 listed Attic
space.
[54][55]
The Waterside Theatre (which is not part of the Royal Shakespeare Theatre complex)
re-opened in December 2004, then closed again in September 2008. During this span,
the theatre housed the Shakespearience visitor attraction.[56] This has now been turned
into the Clore Learning Centre, the Royal Shakespeare Company's education and
events venue.
In 1986, Stratford-upon-Avon was the venue for the disastrous provincial try-out of the
ill-fated musical Carrie, based on the Stephen King novel.

Tudor World is a museum which explores the time when Shakespeare lived. It is based in a Grade II* listed town centre
Tudor property and is the only museum in the country dedicated to Tudor times. Every week there is a walk around the
town with Shakespeare.
[61] The Mechanical Art and Design museum, but better known as MAD museum, is a museum
in Henley Street of "brilliant-but-bonkers machines" made by Kinetic artists. Items on show include mechanised
flipbooks and a musical typewriter.
[62]
There are five houses relating to Shakespeare's life which are owned and cared
for by the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust. These include Hall's Croft (the onetime home of Shakespeare's daughter, Susanna, and her husband Dr. John Hall)
and Nash's House, which stands alongside the site of New Place which was
owned by Shakespeare himself, wherein he died. In Shottery is Anne
Hathaway's Cottage, the home of Shakespeare's wife's family prior to her
marriage. Mary Arden's House (Palmer's Farm), the family home of his mother,
is in Wilmcote. Elsewhere in the district are farms and buildings at Snitterfield,
that belonged to the family of Shakespeare's father.
In addition, King Edward VI School, located on the corner of Church Street
and Chapel Lane, is a grammar school thought to have been attended by
William Shakespeare. In 2016, the school room where Shakespeare is believed
to have studied opened to visitors.
[63]
Stratford has one library, located in Henley Street within a medieval building.[14] Since 2008, Stratford has hosted the
Stratford-upon-Avon Literary Festival, which holds two literary events a year, with one event in spring and a shorter
festival in autumn.[64][65] The festival has talks from celebrity guests, workshops and educational programmes and has
become one of the most noted literary festivals in the country,
[66] with speakers including: Kirsty Wark, Alan Johnson
MP, Baroness Shirley Williams, Tom Kerridge, Sir Tim Rice, John McCarthy, Michael Rosen, Howard Jacobson,
Jeffrey Archer, Michael Palin, Jeremy Paxman, Alastair Campbell and Paul Merton.
[67]
Every year, Shakespeare's birthday is celebrated in Stratford. The celebration takes place over two days on the weekend
closest to the 26th of April, the date of his christening, and includes musical performances, drama and a parade through
the town.[68]
 In 2016, events were held in Stratford to mark the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare's death.[69]
 Henley Street, one of the town's oldest streets, underwent substantial
architectural change between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries. John
Shakespeare's large half-timbered dwelling, purchased by him in 1556, was in
1564 the birthplace of his son William. According to a descriptive placard
provided for tourists there:
The property remained in the ownership of Shakespeare's direct
descendants until 1670, when his granddaughter, Elizabeth
Barnard, died. As she had no children, Elizabeth left the estate to
her relative Thomas Hart, Shakespeare's great-nephew. The main
house became a tenanted inn called the Maidenhead (later the
Swan and Maidenhead) following the death of John Shakespeare
in 1601. Members of the Hart family continued living in the small
adjoining cottage throughout the century.
At the end of the 19th century, Edward Gibbs "renovated" the building to more closely represent the original Tudor
farmhouse. Adjacent to Shakespeare's Birthplace stands the Shakespeare Centre, completed in 1964 and not far from the
Carnegie Library, opened in 1905.
The large half-timbered building, which now comprises numbers 19, 20 and 21, was formerly the White Lion Inn.
[74]
It
is first mentioned in 1603.[75] and was adjoined on the east by a smaller inn called the "Swan". In 1745 the latter was
purchased by John Payton, who also acquired the "Lion" five years later and rebuilt the whole premises on a greatly
enlarged scale. (Cal. of Trust Title Deeds, no. 147.) The work was completed by James Collins of Birmingham, builder,
in 1753. (Contract, Trust Title Deeds, no. 167.) Payton "brought the house into great vogue"
[76]
though Byng in 1792
complained that "at the noted White Lion, I met with nothing but incivility" (cited from Torrington Diaries (ed.
Andrews), iii, 152).
[74] Payton was succeeded as innkeeper by his son John, and its reputation as one of the best inns on
the Holyhead road must have contributed not a little to the prosperity of the town. Garrick stayed at the "White Lion"
during the Jubilee of 1769 (Saunders MSS. 82, fol. 20)[74]
 and George IV, as Prince Regent, visited it when he came to
Stratford in 1806.[77]
Its great days came to an end after John Payton the younger sold it to Thomas Arkell in 1823.[74]
The building is now home to the Enchanted Manor Museum at the Creaky Cauldron and Magic Alley; the Box
Brownie Café; Doug Brown's Really Good Gift Company; and the Not Just Shakespeare Tourist Information Centre.
Henley Street is now a major tourist and shopping precinct with many al fresco cafés and street entertainers.
Sheep Street runs from Ely Street eastwards to the Waterside. It was a
residential quarter in the 16th century, some of the buildings were rebuilt
following the fire of 1595, although many, such as Number 40, date from 1480.
Formerly a two-story building that was extended in the early twentieth century
has a lower story of substantial close-set studding: the upper is of more widely
spaced thin vertical timbers.
[78]
As the name suggests Sheep Street, which leads down from the Town Hall to
Waterside and the RST, was from early times and until the late 19th century, the
area where sheep, brought from the neighbouring Cotswold Hills to be bought
and sold.[13]
 Today it is the restaurant centre of the town.
The Shrieves House is one of the oldest still lived in houses in the town and
Shakespeare is said to have based his character of Sir John Falstaff on one of the residents, his godson's uncle. Oliver
Cromwell is thought to have stayed here in 1651. He wrote a letter from the town to Lord Wharton on 27 August
1651,[79]
 before the Battle of Worcester
 The Stratford on Avon and Broadway Railway Society aims to re-open the
closed railway line from Stratford-upon-Avon to Honeybourne, with a later
extension to Broadway, Worcestershire. The Honeybourne Line is being
extended towards Honeybourne from Cheltenham Racecourse to connect with
the Cotswold Line. The Cotswold trains run by Great Western Railway go to
Worcester Shrub Hill, Worcester Foregate Street, Great Malvern and Hereford
westwards and eastwards to Oxford, Reading and London Paddington.
The Stratford-upon-Avon and Midland Junction Railway connected Stratford
with the main line of the London & North Western Railway at Blisworth until
passenger trains were withdrawn in 1952.[84]
Several companies offer sightseeing
cruises along the Avon and the canal, some using old river barges that have
been converted to this use.
[85]
The town has numerous cycle paths and is the terminus of the Stratford-uponAvon Canal where it meets the Avon. A park and ride scheme was launched in
2006. The Stratford greenway is a 5 miles (8.0 km) traffic free cycle path,
which used to be part of the rail network until the early 1960s and is now part
of the Sustrans National Cycle Network (routes NCR 5 and NCR 41). Starting
from town, it heads along the river and racecourse towards Welford-on-Avon
and Long Marston with a cycle hire and café available at the start of the
Greenway at Seven Meadows Road.[86]
The manually powered Stratford-upon-Avon chain ferry was opened in 1937
and links Waterside, roughly halfway between the Royal Shakespeare Theatre
and Holy Trinity Church, with the water meadows on the opposite side of the
river. It was the last of its kind to be built in Britain.[87]
Birmingham Airport is 18 miles (29 km) to the north-west, with scheduled
flights to many national and international destinations.
Bus services are mostly provided by Stagecoach in Warwickshire (formerly
Midland Red South) and Johnsons.
Stratford-upon-Avon Rugby Club is situated on Loxley Rd at their home
ground Pearcecroft.
[89] The club fields three senior sides and a colts under 18
team with the 1st XV currently playing in Midlands 1 (West).
[90] The club also
has a large mini and junior section.[91] Stratford-upon-Avon Cricket Club
Ground is by the river opposite the Royal Shakespeare Theatre. The first match
recorded there was in 1880; it has hosted first-class games since 1951 and
women's One Day Internationals since 2005. Stratford Town F.C. are based at
the DCS Stadium in Tiddington; they won the Midland Alliance in the 2012/3
season and were promoted to Division One South & West of the Southern
Football League. The town's 5k parkrun event started in February 2016 and
operates on the Recreation Ground every Saturday at 9 am. A junior parkrun (h
ttps://www.parkrun.org.uk/stratforduponavonrec-juniors/) started in June 2019
and takes place every Sunday at 9 am for children aged 4 to 14.
Stratford Racecourse is located along the Luddington Road, about one mile from the centre of town which holds 18
meetings every year. It is a National Hunt course with an oval track of approximately a mile and a quarter and is
considered to be one of the UK's leading small racecourses.
[92]
