The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, often shortened to
Hamlet (/ˈhæmlɪt/), is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare
sometime between 1599 and 1601. It is Shakespeare's longest play,
with 29,551 words. Set in Denmark, the play depicts Prince Hamlet
and his revenge against his uncle, Claudius, who has murdered
Hamlet's father in order to seize his throne and marry Hamlet's
mother.
Hamlet is considered among the most powerful and influential works
of world literature, with a story capable of "seemingly endless
retelling and adaptation by others".
[1]
It was one of Shakespeare's
most popular works during his lifetime
[2] and still ranks among his
most performed, topping the performance list of the Royal
Shakespeare Company and its predecessors in Stratford-upon-Avon
since 1879.[3]
It has inspired many other writers—from Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe and Charles Dickens to James Joyce and Iris
Murdoch—and has been described as "the world's most filmed story
after Cinderella".
[4]
The story of Shakespeare's Hamlet was derived from the legend of
Amleth, preserved by 13th-century chronicler Saxo Grammaticus in
his Gesta Danorum, as subsequently retold by the 16th-century
scholar François de Belleforest. Shakespeare may also have drawn
on an earlier Elizabethan play known today as the Ur-Hamlet,
though some scholars believe Shakespeare wrote the Ur-Hamlet,
later revising it to create the version of Hamlet that exists today. He
almost certainly wrote his version of the title role for his fellow actor,
Richard Burbage, the leading tragedian of Shakespeare's time. In the
400 years since its inception, the role has been performed by
numerous highly acclaimed actors in each successive century.
Three different early versions of the play are extant: the First Quarto
(Q1, 1603); the Second Quarto (Q2, 1604); and the First Folio (F1,
1623). Each version includes lines and entire scenes missing from the
others. The play's structure and depth of characterisation have inspired much critical scrutiny. One such
example is the centuries-old debate about Hamlet's hesitation to kill his uncle, which some see as merely a plot
device to prolong the action but which others argue is a dramatisation of the complex philosophical and ethical
issues that surround cold-blooded murder, calculated revenge, and thwarted desire. More recently,
psychoanalytic critics have examined Hamlet's unconscious desires, while feminist critics have re-evaluated
and attempted to rehabilitate the often-maligned characters of Ophelia and Gertrude.
The protagonist of Hamlet is Prince Hamlet of Denmark, son of the recently deceased King Hamlet, and
nephew of King Claudius, his father's brother and successor. Claudius hastily married King Hamlet's widow,
Gertrude, Hamlet's mother, and took the throne for himself. Denmark has a long-standing feud with
neighbouring Norway, in which King Hamlet slew King Fortinbras of Norway in a battle some years ago.
Although Denmark defeated Norway and the Norwegian throne fell to King Fortinbras's infirm brother,
Denmark fears that an invasion led by the dead Norwegian king's son, Prince Fortinbras, is imminent.
On a cold night on the ramparts of Elsinore, the Danish royal castle, the sentries Bernardo and Marcellus
discuss a ghost resembling the late King Hamlet which they have recently seen, and bring Prince Hamlet's
friend Horatio as a witness. After the ghost appears again, the three vow to tell Prince Hamlet what they have
witnessed.
As the court gathers the next day, while King Claudius and Queen Gertrude discuss affairs of state with their
elderly adviser Polonius, Hamlet looks on glumly. During the court, Claudius grants permission for Polonius's
son Laertes to return to school in France and sends envoys to inform the King of Norway about Fortinbras.
Claudius also scolds Hamlet for continuing to grieve over his father and forbids him to return to his schooling
in Wittenberg. After the court exits, Hamlet despairs of his father's death and his mother's hasty remarriage.
Learning of the ghost from Horatio, Hamlet resolves to see it himself.
As Polonius's son Laertes prepares to depart for a visit to France,
Polonius offers him advice that culminates in the maxim "to thine own
self be true."[6] Polonius's daughter, Ophelia, admits her interest in
Hamlet, but Laertes warns her against seeking the prince's attention,
and Polonius orders her to reject his advances. That night on the
rampart, the ghost appears to Hamlet, telling the prince that he was
murdered by Claudius and demanding that Hamlet avenge him.
Hamlet agrees, and the ghost vanishes. The prince confides to Horatio
and the sentries that from now on he plans to "put an antic disposition
on", or act as though he has gone mad, and forces them to swear to
keep his plans for revenge secret; however, he remains uncertain of
the ghost's reliability.

Soon thereafter, Ophelia rushes to her father, telling him that Hamlet arrived at her door the prior night halfundressed and behaving erratically. Polonius blames love for Hamlet's madness and resolves to inform
Claudius and Gertrude. As he enters to do so, the king and queen finish welcoming Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern, two student acquaintances of Hamlet, to Elsinore. The royal couple has requested that the
students investigate the cause of Hamlet's mood and behaviour. Additional news requires that Polonius wait to
be heard: messengers from Norway inform Claudius that the King of Norway has rebuked Prince Fortinbras
for attempting to re-fight his father's battles. The forces that Fortinbras had conscripted to march against
Denmark will instead be sent against Poland, though they will pass through Danish territory to get there.
Polonius tells Claudius and Gertrude his theory regarding Hamlet's behaviour and speaks to Hamlet in a hall of
the castle to try to uncover more information. Hamlet feigns madness and subtly insults Polonius all the while.
When Rosencrantz and Guildenstern arrive, Hamlet greets his "friends" warmly but quickly discerns that they
are spies. Hamlet admits that he is upset at his situation but refuses to give the true reason, instead commenting
on "What a piece of work is a man". Rosencrantz and Guildenstern tell Hamlet that they have brought along a
troupe of actors that they met while traveling to Elsinore. Hamlet, after welcoming the actors and dismissing
his friends-turned-spies, asks them to deliver a soliloquy about the death of King Priam and Queen Hecuba at
the climax of the Trojan War. Impressed by their delivery of the speech, he plots to stage The Murder of
Gonzago, a play featuring a death in the style of his father's murder and to determine the truth of the ghost's
story, as well as Claudius's guilt or innocence, by studying Claudius's reaction.
Polonius forces Ophelia to return Hamlet's love letters and tokens of affection to the prince while he and
Claudius watch from afar to evaluate Hamlet's reaction. Hamlet is walking alone in the hall as the King and
Polonius await Ophelia's entrance, musing whether "to be or not to be". When Ophelia enters and tries to
return Hamlet's things, Hamlet accuses her of immodesty and cries "get thee to a nunnery", though it is unclear
whether this, too, is a show of madness or genuine distress. His reaction convinces Claudius that Hamlet is not
mad for love. Shortly thereafter, the court assembles to watch the play Hamlet has commissioned. After seeing
the Player King murdered by his rival pouring poison in his ear, Claudius abruptly rises and runs from the
room; for Hamlet, this is proof positive of his uncle's guilt.
Gertrude summons Hamlet to her chamber to demand an explanation.
Meanwhile, Claudius talks to himself about the impossibility of
repenting, since he still has possession of his ill-gotten goods: his
brother's crown and wife. He sinks to his knees. Hamlet, on his way
to visit his mother, sneaks up behind him but does not kill him,
reasoning that killing Claudius while he is praying will send him
straight to heaven while his father's ghost is stuck in purgatory. In the
queen's bedchamber, Hamlet and Gertrude fight bitterly. Polonius,
spying on the conversation from behind a tapestry, calls for help as
Gertrude, believing Hamlet wants to kill her, calls out for help herself.
Hamlet, believing it is Claudius, stabs wildly, killing Polonius, but he
pulls aside the curtain and sees his mistake. In a rage, Hamlet brutally
insults his mother for her apparent ignorance of Claudius's villainy, but the ghost enters and reprimands Hamlet
for his inaction and harsh words. Unable to see or hear the ghost herself, Gertrude takes Hamlet's conversation
with it as further evidence of madness. After begging the queen to stop sleeping with Claudius, Hamlet leaves,
dragging Polonius's corpse away.

Hamlet jokes with Claudius about where he has hidden Polonius's body, and the king, fearing for his life,
sends Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to accompany Hamlet to England with a sealed letter to the English king
requesting that Hamlet be executed immediately.
Unhinged by grief at Polonius's death, Ophelia wanders Elsinore. Laertes arrives back from France, enraged
by his father's death and his sister's madness. Claudius convinces Laertes that Hamlet is solely responsible, but
a letter soon arrives indicating that Hamlet has returned to Denmark, foiling Claudius's plan. Claudius switches
tactics, proposing a fencing match between Laertes and Hamlet to settle their differences. Laertes will be given
a poison-tipped foil, and, if that fails, Claudius will offer Hamlet poisoned wine as a congratulation. Gertrude
interrupts to report that Ophelia has drowned, though it is unclear whether it was suicide or an accident caused
by her madness.
Horatio has received a letter from Hamlet, explaining that the prince
escaped by negotiating with pirates who attempted to attack his
England-bound ship, and the friends reunite offstage. Two
gravediggers discuss Ophelia's apparent suicide while digging her
grave. Hamlet arrives with Horatio and banters with one of the
gravediggers, who unearths the skull of a jester from Hamlet's
childhood, Yorick. Hamlet picks up the skull, saying "alas, poor
Yorick" as he contemplates mortality. Ophelia's funeral procession
approaches, led by Laertes. Hamlet and Horatio initially hide, but
when Hamlet realizes that Ophelia is the one being buried, he reveals
himself, proclaiming his love for her. Laertes and Hamlet fight by
Ophelia's graveside, but the brawl is broken up.
Back at Elsinore, Hamlet explains to Horatio that he had discovered
Claudius's letter with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern's belongings and
replaced it with a forged copy indicating that his former friends should
be killed instead. A foppish courtier, Osric, interrupts the conversation to deliver the fencing challenge to
Hamlet. Hamlet, despite Horatio's pleas, accepts it. Hamlet does well at first, leading the match by two hits to
none, and Gertrude raises a toast to him using the poisoned glass of wine Claudius had set aside for Hamlet.
Claudius tries to stop her but is too late: she drinks, and Laertes realizes the plot will be revealed. Laertes
slashes Hamlet with his poisoned blade. In the ensuing scuffle, they switch weapons, and Hamlet wounds
Laertes with his own poisoned sword. Gertrude collapses and, claiming she has been poisoned, dies. In his
dying moments, Laertes reconciles with Hamlet and reveals Claudius's plan. Hamlet rushes at Claudius and
kills him. As the poison takes effect, Hamlet, hearing that Fortinbras is marching through the area, names the
Norwegian prince as his successor. Horatio, distraught at the thought of being the last survivor and living
whilst Hamlet does not, says he will commit suicide by drinking the dregs of Gertrude's poisoned wine, but
Hamlet begs him to live on and tell his story. Hamlet dies in Horatio's arms, proclaiming "the rest is silence".
Fortinbras, who was ostensibly marching towards Poland with his army, arrives at the palace, along with an
English ambassador bringing news of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern's deaths. Horatio promises to recount the
full story of what happened, and Fortinbras, seeing the entire Danish royal family dead, takes the crown for
himself and orders a military funeral to honour Hamlet.
Hamlet-like legends are so widely found (for example in Italy, Spain,
Scandinavia, Byzantium, and Arabia) that the core "hero-as-fool" theme is
possibly Indo-European in origin.[8] Several ancient written precursors to
Hamlet can be identified. The first is the anonymous Scandinavian Saga of
Hrolf Kraki. In this, the murdered king has two sons—Hroar and Helgi—who
spend most of the story in disguise, under false names, rather than feigning
madness, in a sequence of events that differs from Shakespeare's.
[9] The
second is the Roman legend of Brutus, recorded in two separate Latin works.
Its hero, Lucius ("shining, light"), changes his name and persona to Brutus
("dull, stupid"), playing the role of a fool to avoid the fate of his father and
brothers, and eventually slaying his family's killer, King Tarquinius. A 17thcentury Nordic scholar, Torfaeus, compared the Icelandic hero Amlóði
(Amlodi) and the hero Prince Ambales (from the Ambales Saga) to
Shakespeare's Hamlet. Similarities include the prince's feigned madness, his
accidental killing of the king's counsellor in his mother's bedroom, and the
eventual slaying of his uncle.
[10]
Many of the earlier legendary elements are interwoven in the 13th-century
"Life of Amleth" (Latin: Vita Amlethi) by Saxo Grammaticus, part of Gesta
Danorum.
[11] Written in Latin, it reflects classical Roman concepts of virtue and heroism, and was widely
available in Shakespeare's day.
[12] Significant parallels include the prince feigning madness, his mother's hasty
marriage to the usurper, the prince killing a hidden spy, and the prince substituting the execution of two
retainers for his own. A reasonably faithful version of Saxo's story was translated into French in 1570 by
François de Belleforest, in his Histoires tragiques.
[13] Belleforest embellished Saxo's text substantially, almost
doubling its length, and introduced the hero's melancholy.
[14]
According to one theory, Shakespeare's main source is an earlier play—now
lost—known today as the Ur-Hamlet. Possibly written by Thomas Kyd or
even William Shakespeare, the Ur-Hamlet would have existed by 1589, and
would have incorporated a ghost.
[15] Shakespeare's company, the
Chamberlain's Men, may have purchased that play and performed a version
for some time, which Shakespeare reworked.[16] However, since no copy of
the Ur-Hamlet has survived, it is impossible to compare its language and style
with the known works of any of its putative authors. Consequently, there is no
direct evidence that Kyd wrote it, nor any evidence that the play was not an
early version of Hamlet by Shakespeare himself. This latter idea—placing
Hamlet far earlier than the generally accepted date, with a much longer period
of development—has attracted some support.
[b]
The upshot is that scholars cannot assert with any confidence how much
material Shakespeare took from the Ur-Hamlet (if it even existed), how much
from Belleforest or Saxo, and how much from other contemporary sources
(such as Kyd's The Spanish Tragedy). No clear evidence exists that
Shakespeare made any direct references to Saxo's version. However, elements
of Belleforest's version which are not in Saxo's story do appear in Shakespeare's play. Whether Shakespeare
took these from Belleforest directly or from the hypothetical Ur-Hamlet remains unclear.
[23]
Most scholars reject the idea that Hamlet is in any way connected with Shakespeare's only son, Hamnet
Shakespeare, who died in 1596 at age eleven. Conventional wisdom holds that Hamlet is too obviously
connected to legend, and the name Hamnet was quite popular at the time.
[24] However, Stephen Greenblatt
has argued that the coincidence of the names and Shakespeare's grief for the loss of his son may lie at the heart
John Barrymore as Hamlet (1922)
of the tragedy. He notes that the name of Hamnet Sadler, the Stratford neighbour after whom Hamnet was
named, was often written as Hamlet Sadler and that, in the loose orthography of the time, the names were
virtually interchangeable.
[25][26]
Scholars have often speculated that Hamlet's Polonius might have been inspired by William Cecil (Lord
Burghley)—Lord High Treasurer and chief counsellor to Queen Elizabeth I. E. K. Chambers suggested
Polonius's advice to Laertes may have echoed Burghley's to his son Robert Cecil.
[27] John Dover Wilson
thought it almost certain that the figure of Polonius caricatured Burghley.
[28] A. L. Rowse speculated that
Polonius's tedious verbosity might have resembled Burghley's.
[29] Lilian Winstanley thought the name
Corambis (in the First Quarto) did suggest Cecil and Burghley.
[30] Harold Jenkins considers the idea that
Polonius might be a caricature of Burghley to be conjecture, perhaps based on the similar role they each
played at court, and also on Burghley addressing his Ten Precepts to his son, as in the play Polonius offers
"precepts" to Laertes, his own son.[31] Jenkins suggests that any personal satire may be found in the name
"Polonius", which might point to a Polish or Polonian connection.[32] G. R. Hibbard hypothesised that
differences in names (Corambis/Polonius:Montano/Raynoldo) between the First Quarto and other editions
might reflect a desire not to offend scholars at Oxford University.
[c]
"Any dating of Hamlet must be tentative", cautions the New
Cambridge editor, Phillip Edwards.
[d] The earliest date estimate relies
on Hamlet's frequent allusions to Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, itself
dated to mid-1599.[40][41] The latest date estimate is based on an
entry, of 26 July 1602, in the Register of the Stationers' Company,
indicating that Hamlet was "latelie Acted by the Lo: Chamberleyne
his servantes".
In 1598, Francis Meres published his Palladis Tamia, a survey of
English literature from Chaucer to its present day, within which
twelve of Shakespeare's plays are named. Hamlet is not among them,
suggesting that it had not yet been written. As Hamlet was very
popular, Bernard Lott, the series editor of New Swan, believes it
"unlikely that he [Meres] would have overlooked ... so significant a
piece".
[38]
The phrase "little eyases"
[42]
in the First Folio (F1) may allude to the
Children of the Chapel, whose popularity in London forced the Globe
company into provincial touring.[e] This became known as the War of
the Theatres, and supports a 1601 dating.[38] Katherine Duncan-Jones accepts a 1600–01 attribution for the
date Hamlet was written, but notes that the Lord Chamberlain's Men, playing Hamlet in the 3000-capacity
Globe, were unlikely to be put to any disadvantage by an audience of "barely one hundred" for the Children
of the Chapel's equivalent play, Antonio's Revenge; she believes that Shakespeare, confident in the superiority
of his own work, was making a playful and charitable allusion to his friend John Marston's very similar
piece.
[44]
A contemporary of Shakespeare's, Gabriel Harvey, wrote a marginal note in his copy of the 1598 edition of
Chaucer's works, which some scholars use as dating evidence. Harvey's note says that "the wiser sort" enjoy
Hamlet, and implies that the Earl of Essex—executed in February 1601 for rebellion—was still alive. Other
scholars consider this inconclusive. Edwards, for example, concludes that the "sense of time is so confused in
Date
Title page of the 1605
printing (Q2) of Hamlet
The first page of the First Folio
printing of Hamlet, 1623
Harvey's note that it is really of little use in trying to date Hamlet". This is because the same note also refers to
Spenser and Watson as if they were still alive ("our flourishing metricians"), but also mentions "Owen's new
epigrams", published in 1607.[45]
From the early 17th century, the play was famous for its ghost and vivid dramatisation of melancholy and
insanity, leading to a procession of mad courtiers and ladies in Jacobean and Caroline drama.
[70][71] Though it
remained popular with mass audiences, late 17th-century Restoration critics saw Hamlet as primitive and
disapproved of its lack of unity and decorum.
[72][73] This view changed drastically in the 18th century, when
critics regarded Hamlet as a hero—a pure, brilliant young man thrust into unfortunate circumstances.
[74] By
Analysis and criticism
Critical history
Hamlet's statement that his
dark clothes are the outer
sign of his inner grief
demonstrates strong
rhetorical skill (artist: Eugène
Delacroix 1834).
the mid-18th century, however, the advent of Gothic literature brought psychological and mystical readings,
returning madness and the ghost to the forefront.
[75] Not until the late 18th century did critics and performers
begin to view Hamlet as confusing and inconsistent. Before then, he was either mad, or not; either a hero, or
not; with no in-betweens.
[76] These developments represented a fundamental change in literary criticism,
which came to focus more on character and less on plot.
[77] By the 19th century, Romantic critics valued
Hamlet for its internal, individual conflict reflecting the strong contemporary emphasis on internal struggles
and inner character in general.
[78] Then too, critics started to focus on Hamlet's delay as a character trait, rather
than a plot device.
[77] This focus on character and internal struggle continued into the 20th century, when
criticism branched in several directions, discussed in context and interpretation below.
Much of Hamlet's language is courtly: elaborate, witty discourse, as
recommended by Baldassare Castiglione's 1528 etiquette guide, The
Courtier. This work specifically advises royal retainers to amuse their masters
with inventive language. Osric and Polonius, especially, seem to respect this
injunction. Claudius's speech is rich with rhetorical figures—as is Hamlet's
and, at times, Ophelia's—while the language of Horatio, the guards, and the
gravediggers is simpler. Claudius's high status is reinforced by using the royal
first person plural ("we" or "us"), and anaphora mixed with metaphor to
resonate with Greek political speeches.
[83]
Of all the characters, Hamlet has the greatest rhetorical skill. He uses highly
developed metaphors, stichomythia, and in nine memorable words deploys
both anaphora and asyndeton: "to die: to sleep— / To sleep, perchance to
dream".
[84]
In contrast, when occasion demands, he is precise and
straightforward, as when he explains his inward emotion to his mother: "But I
have that within which passes show, / These but the trappings and the suits of
woe".
[85] At times, he relies heavily on puns to express his true thoughts
while simultaneously concealing them.
[86] His "nunnery" remarks[i]
to
Dramatic structure
Length
Language
John Everett Millais' Ophelia (1852)
depicts Lady Ophelia's mysterious
death by drowning. In the play, the
gravediggers discuss whether
Ophelia's death was a suicide and
whether she merits a Christian burial.
Ophelia are an example of a cruel double meaning as nunnery was Elizabethan slang for brothel.
[88][j] His first
words in the play are a pun; when Claudius addresses him as "my cousin Hamlet, and my son", Hamlet says
as an aside: "A little more than kin, and less than kind."[91]
An unusual rhetorical device, hendiadys, appears in several places in the play. Examples are found in
Ophelia's speech at the end of the nunnery scene: "Th'expectancy and rose of the fair state"
[92] and "And I, of
ladies most deject and wretched".
[93] Many scholars have found it odd that Shakespeare would, seemingly
arbitrarily, use this rhetorical form throughout the play. One explanation may be that Hamlet was written later
in Shakespeare's life, when he was adept at matching rhetorical devices to characters and the plot. Linguist
George T. Wright suggests that hendiadys had been used deliberately to heighten the play's sense of duality
and dislocation.[94] Pauline Kiernan argues that Shakespeare changed English drama forever in Hamlet
because he "showed how a character's language can often be saying several things at once, and contradictory
meanings at that, to reflect fragmented thoughts and disturbed feelings". She gives the example of Hamlet's
advice to Ophelia, "get thee to a nunnery", which is simultaneously a reference to a place of chastity and a
slang term for a brothel, reflecting Hamlet's confused feelings about female sexuality.
[89]
Hamlet's soliloquies have also captured the attention of scholars. Hamlet interrupts himself, vocalising either
disgust or agreement with himself and embellishing his own words. He has difficulty expressing himself
directly and instead blunts the thrust of his thought with wordplay. It is not until late in the play, after his
experience with the pirates, that Hamlet is able to articulate his feelings freely.
[95]
Hamlet is often perceived as a philosophical character, expounding ideas that are now described as relativist,
existentialist, and sceptical. For example, he expresses a subjectivistic idea when he says to Rosencrantz:
"there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so".
[98] The idea that nothing is real except in the
Context and interpretation
Religious
Philosophical
Philosophical ideas in Hamlet are
similar to those of the French writer
Michel de Montaigne, a
contemporary of Shakespeare's
(artist: Thomas de Leu, fl. 1560–
1612).
Freud suggested that an
unconscious Oedipal
conflict caused Hamlet's
hesitations (artist: Eugène
Delacroix 1844).
mind of the individual finds its roots in the Greek Sophists, who
argued that since nothing can be perceived except through the senses
—and since all individuals sense, and therefore perceive things
differently—there is no absolute truth, but rather only relative
truth.[99] The clearest alleged instance of existentialism is in the "to
be, or not to be"
[100] speech, where Hamlet is thought by some to use
"being" to allude to life and action, and "not being" to death and
inaction.
Hamlet reflects the contemporary scepticism promoted by the French
Renaissance humanist Michel de Montaigne.
[101] Prior to
Montaigne's time, humanists such as Pico della Mirandola had argued
that man was God's greatest creation, made in God's image and able
to choose his own nature, but this view was subsequently challenged
in Montaigne's Essais of 1580. Hamlet's "What a piece of work is a
man" seems to echo many of Montaigne's ideas, and many scholars
have discussed whether Shakespeare drew directly from Montaigne or
whether both men were simply reacting similarly to the spirit of the