King Lear is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare. There are
two versions, but modern editors usually conflate these to produce a
single play.
Both versions are based on the mythological Leir of Britain. King
Lear relinquishes his power and land to two of his daughters. He
becomes destitute and insane and a proscribed crux of political
machinations.
The first known performance of any version of Shakespeare's play
was on St. Stephen's Day in 1606. The three extant publications from
which modern editors derive their texts are the 1608 quarto (Q1) and
the 1619 quarto (Q2, unofficial and based on Q1) and the 1623 First
Folio. The quarto versions differ significantly from the folio version.
The play was often revised after the English Restoration for audiences
who disliked its dark and depressing tone, but since the 19th century
Shakespeare's original play has been regarded as one of his supreme
achievements.
Both the title role and the supporting roles have been coveted by accomplished actors, and the play has been
widely adapted.
King Lear of Britain, elderly and wanting to retire from the duties of the monarchy, decides to divide his realm
among his three daughters, and declares he will offer the largest share to the one who loves him most. The
eldest, Goneril, speaks first, declaring her love for her father in fulsome terms. Moved by her flattery Lear
proceeds to grant to Goneril her share as soon as she has finished her declaration, before Regan and Cordelia
have a chance to speak. He then awards to Regan her share as soon as she has spoken. When it is finally the
turn of his youngest and favourite daughter, Cordelia, at first she refuses to say anything ("Nothing, my Lord")
and then declares there is nothing to compare her love to, no words to properly express it; she says honestly
but bluntly that she loves him according to her bond, no more and no less, and will reserve half of her love for
her future husband. Infuriated, Lear disinherits Cordelia and divides her share between her elder sisters.
Lear – King of Britain
Earl of Gloucester
Earl of Kent – later disguised as Caius
Fool – Lear's fool
Edgar – Gloucester's first-born son
Edmund – Gloucester's illegitimate son
Goneril – Lear's eldest daughter
Regan – Lear's second daughter
Cordelia – Lear's youngest daughter
Duke of Albany – Goneril's husband
Duke of Cornwall – Regan's husband
Gentleman – attends Cordelia
Oswald – Goneril's loyal steward
King of France – suitor and later husband to
Cordelia
Duke of Burgundy – suitor to Cordelia
Old man – tenant of Gloucester
Curan – courtier
Characters
Synopsis
Act I
Cordelia in the Court of King Lear (1873) by Sir
John Gilbert
King Lear: Cordelia's Farewell by Edwin Austin
Abbey
The Earl of Gloucester and the Earl of Kent observe that,
by dividing his realm between Goneril and Regan, Lear
has awarded his realm in equal shares to the peerages of
the Duke of Albany (Goneril's husband) and the Duke of
Cornwall (Regan's husband). Kent objects to Lear's
unfair treatment of Cordelia. Enraged by Kent's protests,
Lear banishes him from the country. Lear then summons
the Duke of Burgundy and the King of France, who
have both proposed marriage to Cordelia. Learning that
Cordelia has been disinherited, the Duke of Burgundy
withdraws his suit, but the King of France is impressed
by her honesty and marries her nonetheless. The King of
France is shocked by Lear's decision because up until
this time Lear has only praised and favoured Cordelia
("... she whom even but now was your best object, / The
argument of your praise, balm of your age, ...").
[1] Meanwhile, Gloucester has introduced his illegitimate son
Edmund to Kent.
Lear announces he will live alternately with Goneril and
Regan, and their husbands. He reserves to himself a
retinue of 100 knights, to be supported by his daughters.
Goneril and Regan speak privately, revealing that their
declarations of love were false and that they view Lear as
a foolish old man.
Gloucester's bastard son Edmund resents his illegitimate
status and plots to dispose of his legitimate older
stepbrother, Edgar. He tricks his father with a forged
letter, making him think that Edgar plans to usurp the
estate. The Earl of Kent returns from exile in disguise
(calling himself Caius), and Lear hires him as a servant. At Albany and Goneril's house, Lear and Kent quarrel
with Oswald, Goneril's steward. Lear discovers that now that Goneril has power, she no longer respects him.
She orders him to reduce the number of his disorderly retinue. Enraged, Lear departs for Regan's home. The
Fool reproaches Lear with his foolishness in giving everything to Regan and Goneril and predicts that Regan
will treat him no better.
Edmund learns from Curan, a courtier, that there is likely to be war between Albany and Cornwall and that
Regan and Cornwall are to arrive at Gloucester's house that evening. Taking advantage of the arrival of the
duke and Regan, Edmund fakes an attack by Edgar, and Gloucester is completely taken in. He disinherits
Edgar and proclaims him an outlaw.
Bearing Lear's message to Regan, Kent meets Oswald again at Gloucester's home, quarrels with him again
and is put in the stocks by Regan and her husband Cornwall. When Lear arrives, he objects to the
mistreatment of his messenger, but Regan is as dismissive of her father as Goneril was. Lear is enraged but
impotent. Goneril arrives and supports Regan's argument against him. Lear yields completely to his rage. He
rushes out into a storm to rant against his ungrateful daughters, accompanied by the mocking Fool. Kent later
follows to protect him. Gloucester protests against Lear's mistreatment. With Lear's retinue of a hundred
knights dissolved, the only companions he has left are his Fool and Kent. Wandering on the heath after the
storm, Edgar, in the guise of a madman named Tom o' Bedlam, meets Lear. Edgar babbles madly while Lear
denounces his daughters. Kent leads them all to shelter.
Act II
King Lear, Benjamin West (1788)
Edmund betrays Gloucester to Cornwall, Regan, and Goneril. He
reveals evidence that his father knows of an impending French
invasion designed to reinstate Lear to the throne; and in fact, a French
army has landed in Britain. Once Edmund leaves with Goneril to
warn Albany about the invasion, Gloucester is arrested, and Regan
and Cornwall gouge out Gloucester's eyes. As they are doing this, a
servant is overcome with rage by what he is witnessing and attacks
Cornwall, mortally wounding him. Regan kills the servant and tells
Gloucester that Edmund betrayed him; then she turns him out to
wander the heath, too.
Edgar, in his madman's disguise, meets his blinded father on the heath. Gloucester, sightless and failing to
recognise Edgar's voice, begs him to lead him to a cliff at Dover so that he may jump to his death. Goneril
discovers that she finds Edmund more attractive than her honest husband Albany, whom she regards as
cowardly. Albany has developed a conscience—he is disgusted by the sisters' treatment of Lear and
Gloucester—and denounces his wife. Goneril sends Edmund back to Regan. After receiving news of
Cornwall's death, she fears her newly widowed sister may steal Edmund and sends him a letter through
Oswald. Now alone with Lear, Kent leads him to the French army, which is commanded by Cordelia. But
Lear is half-mad and terribly embarrassed by his earlier follies. At Regan's instigation, Albany joins his forces
with hers against the French. Goneril's suspicions about Regan's motives are confirmed and returned, as Regan
rightly guesses the meaning of her letter and declares to Oswald that she is a more appropriate match for
Edmund. Edgar pretends to lead Gloucester to a cliff, then changes his voice and tells Gloucester he has
miraculously survived a great fall. Lear appears, by now completely mad. He rants that the whole world is
corrupt and runs off.
Oswald appears, still looking for Edmund. On Regan's orders, he tries to kill Gloucester but is killed by Edgar.
In Oswald's pocket, Edgar finds Goneril's letter, in which she encourages Edmund to kill her husband and take
her as his wife. Kent and Cordelia take charge of Lear, whose madness quickly passes. Regan, Goneril,
Albany, and Edmund meet with their forces. Albany insists that they fight the French invaders but not harm
Lear or Cordelia. The two sisters lust for Edmund, who has made promises to both. He considers the dilemma
and plots the deaths of Albany, Lear, and Cordelia. Edgar gives Goneril's letter to Albany. The armies meet in
battle, the British defeat the French, and Lear and Cordelia are captured. Edmund sends Lear and Cordelia off
with secret joint orders from him (representing Regan and her forces) and Goneril (representing the forces of
her estranged husband, Albany) for the execution of Cordelia.
The victorious British leaders meet, and the recently widowed Regan now declares she will marry Edmund.
But Albany exposes the intrigues of Edmund and Goneril and proclaims Edmund a traitor. Regan falls ill,
having been poisoned by Goneril, and is escorted offstage, where she dies. Edmund defies Albany, who calls
for a trial by combat. Edgar appears masked and in armour and challenges Edmund to a duel. No one knows
who he is. Edgar wounds Edmund fatally, though Edmund does not die immediately. Albany confronts
Goneril with the letter which was intended to be his death warrant; she flees in shame and rage. Edgar reveals
himself and reports that Gloucester died offstage from the shock and joy of learning that Edgar is alive, after
Edgar revealed himself to his father.
Act III
Act IV
Act V
Lear and Cordelia by Ford Madox Brown
The first edition of Raphael
Holinshed's Chronicles of England,
Scotlande, and Irelande, printed in
1577.
Offstage, Goneril, her plans thwarted, commits suicide.
The dying Edmund decides, though he admits it is
against his own character, to try to save Lear and
Cordelia, but his confession comes too late. Soon after,
Albany sends men to countermand Edmund's orders.
Lear enters bearing Cordelia's corpse in his arms, having
survived by killing the executioner. Kent appears and
Lear now recognises him. Albany urges Lear to resume
his throne, but as with Gloucester, the trials Lear has
been through have finally overwhelmed him, and he dies.
Albany then asks Kent and Edgar to take charge of the
throne. Kent declines, explaining that his master is calling
him on a journey and he must follow. Finally, Albany (in
the quarto version) or Edgar (in the folio version) implies
that he will now become king.
Shakespeare's play is based on various accounts of the semi-legendary
Brythonic figure Leir of Britain, whose name has been linked by
some scholars to the Brythonic god Lir/Llŷr, though in actuality the
names are not etymologically related.[2][3][4] Shakespeare's most
important source is probably the second edition of The Chronicles of
England, Scotlande, and Irelande by Raphael Holinshed, published in
1587. Holinshed himself found the story in the earlier Historia Regum
Britanniae by Geoffrey of Monmouth, which was written in the 12th
century. Edmund Spenser's The Faerie Queene, published 1590, also
contains a character named Cordelia, who also dies from hanging, as
in King Lear.
[5]
Other possible sources are the anonymous play King Leir (published
in 1605); The Mirror for Magistrates (1574), by John Higgins; The
Malcontent (1604), by John Marston; The London Prodigal (1605);
Montaigne's Essays, which were translated into English by John
Florio in 1603; An Historical Description of Iland of Britaine (1577),
by William Harrison; Remaines Concerning Britaine (1606), by
William Camden; Albion's England (1589), by William Warner; and A
Declaration of egregious Popish Impostures (1603), by Samuel
Harsnett, which provided some of the language used by Edgar while
he feigns madness.
[6] King Lear is also a literary variant of a common
folk tale, Love Like Salt, Aarne–Thompson type 923, in which a
father rejects his youngest daughter for a statement of her love that
does not please him.
[7][8]
The source of the subplot involving Gloucester, Edgar, and Edmund is a tale in Philip Sidney's Countess of
Pembroke's Arcadia (1580–90), with a blind Paphlagonian king and his two sons, Leonatus and Plexitrus.
[9]
Sources
Changes from source material
Cordelia, Alexander Johnston (artist)
(c.1894)
Title page of the first quarto edition,
published in 1608
Besides the subplot involving the Earl of Gloucester and his sons, the
principal innovation Shakespeare made to this story was the death of
Cordelia and Lear at the end; in the account by Geoffrey of
Monmouth, Cordelia restores Lear to the throne, and succeeds him as
ruler after his death. During the 17th century, Shakespeare's tragic
ending was much criticised and alternative versions were written by
Nahum Tate, in which the leading characters survived and Edgar and
Cordelia were married (despite the fact that Cordelia was previously
betrothed to the King of France). As Harold Bloom states: "Tate's
version held the stage for almost 150 years, until Edmund Kean
reinstated the play's tragic ending in 1823."[10]
There is no direct evidence to
indicate when King Lear was
written or first performed. It
is thought to have been
composed sometime between
1603 and 1606. A Stationers'
Register entry notes a
performance before James I on 26 December 1606. The 1603 date
originates from words in Edgar's speeches which may derive from
Samuel Harsnett's Declaration of Egregious Popish Impostures
(1603).
[11] A significant issue in the dating of the play is the
relationship of King Lear to the play titled The True Chronicle History
of the Life and Death of King Leir and his Three Daughters, which
was published for the first time after its entry in the Stationers'
Register of 8 May 1605. This play had a significant effect on
Shakespeare, and his close study of it suggests that he was using a
printed copy, which suggests a composition date of 1605–06.[12]
Conversely, Frank Kermode, in the Riverside Shakespeare, considers
the publication of Leir to have been a response to performances of
Shakespeare's already-written play; noting a sonnet by William
Strachey that may have verbal resemblances with Lear, Kermode concludes that "1604–05 seems the best
compromise".
[13]
A line in the play that regards "These late eclipses in the sun and moon"[14] appears to refer to a phenomenon
of two eclipses that occurred over London within a few days of each other—the lunar eclipse of 27 September
1605 and the solar eclipse of 12 October 1605. This remarkable pair of events stirred up much discussion
among astrologers. Edmund's line "A prediction I read this other day…"[15] apparently refers to the published
prognostications of the astrologers, which followed after the eclipses. This suggests that those lines in Act I
were written sometime after both the eclipses and the published comments.
[16]
The modern text of King Lear derives from three sources: two quartos, one published in 1608 (Q1
) and the
other in 1619 (Q2
),
[a] and the version in the First Folio of 1623 (F1
). Q1 has "many errors and muddles".
[17]
Q2 was based on Q1. It introduced corrections and new errors.
[18] Q2 also informed the Folio text.
[19] Quarto
and Folio texts differ significantly. Q1 contains 285 lines not in F1
; F1 contains around 100 lines not in Q1
.
Also, at least a thousand individual words are changed between the two texts, each text has different styles of
punctuation, and about half the verse lines in the F1 are either printed as prose or differently divided in the Q1
.
Early editors, beginning with Alexander Pope, conflated the two texts, creating the modern version that has
Date and text
The first page of King Lear, printed in
the Second Folio of 1632
What we know of Shakespeare's
wide reading and powers of
assimilation seems to show that
he made use of all kinds of
material, absorbing
contradictory viewpoints,
positive and negative, religious
and secular, as if to ensure that
King Lear would offer no single
controlling perspective, but be
open to, indeed demand,
multiple interpretations.
R. A. Foakes
[22]
been commonly used since. The conflated version originated with the
assumptions that the differences in the versions do not indicate any rewriting by the author; that Shakespeare wrote only one original
manuscript, which is now lost; and that the Quarto and Folio versions
contain various distortions of that lost original. Other editors, such as
Nuttall and Bloom, have suggested Shakespeare himself maybe was
involved in reworking passages in the play to accommodate
performances and other textual requirements of the play.
[20]
As early as 1931, Madeleine Doran suggested that the two texts had
independent histories, and that these differences between them were
critically interesting. This argument, however, was not widely
discussed until the late 1970s, when it was revived, principally by
Michael Warren and Gary Taylor, who discuss a variety of theories
including Doran's idea that the Quarto may have been printed from
Shakespeare's foul papers, and that the Folio may have been printed
from a promptbook prepared for a production.[21]
The New Cambridge Shakespeare has published separate editions of
Q and F; the most recent Pelican Shakespeare edition contains both
the 1608 Quarto and the 1623 Folio text as well as a conflated
version; the New Arden edition edited by R.A. Foakes offers a
conflated text that indicates those passages that are found only in Q or
F. Both Anthony Nuttall of Oxford University and Harold Bloom of Yale University have endorsed the view
of Shakespeare having revised the tragedy at least once during his lifetime.
[20] As Bloom indicates: "At the
close of Shakespeare's revised King Lear, a reluctant Edgar becomes King of Britain, accepting his destiny but
in the accents of despair. Nuttall speculates that Edgar, like Shakespeare himself, usurps the power of
manipulating the audience by deceiving poor Gloucester."[20]
John F. Danby, in his Shakespeare's Doctrine of Nature – A Study of King
Lear (1949), argues that Lear dramatizes, among other things, the current
meanings of "Nature." The words "nature," "natural," and "unnatural"
occur over forty times in the play, reflecting a debate in Shakespeare's
time about what nature really was like; this debate pervades the play and
finds symbolic expression in Lear's changing attitude to Thunder. There
are two strongly contrasting views of human nature in the play: that of the
Lear party (Lear, Gloucester, Albany, Kent), exemplifying the philosophy
of Bacon and Hooker, and that of the Edmund party (Edmund, Cornwall,
Goneril, Regan), akin to the views later formulated by Hobbes, though
the latter had not yet begun his philosophy career when Lear was first
performed. Along with the two views of Nature, the play contains two
views of Reason, brought out in Gloucester and Edmund's speeches on
astrology (1.2). The rationality of the Edmund party is one with which a modern audience more readily
Analysis and criticism
Historicist interpretations
Three daughters of King Lear by
Gustav Pope
identifies. But the Edmund party carries bold rationalism to such extremes that it becomes madness: a
madness-in-reason, the ironic counterpart of Lear's "reason in madness" (IV.6.190) and the Fool's wisdom-infolly. This betrayal of reason lies behind the play's later emphasis on feeling.
The two Natures and the two Reasons imply two societies. Edmund is the New Man, a member of an age of
competition, suspicion, glory, in contrast with the older society which has come down from the Middle Ages,
with its belief in co-operation, reasonable decency, and respect for the whole as greater than the part. King
Lear is thus an allegory. The older society, that of the medieval vision, with its doting king, falls into error, and
is threatened by the new Machiavellianism; it is regenerated and saved by a vision of a new order, embodied in
the king's rejected daughter. Cordelia, in the allegorical scheme, is threefold: a person; an ethical principle
(love); and a community. Nevertheless, Shakespeare's understanding of the New Man is so extensive as to
amount almost to sympathy. Edmund is the last great expression in Shakespeare of that side of Renaissance
individualism—the energy, the emancipation, the courage—which has made a positive contribution to the
heritage of the West. "He embodies something vital which a final synthesis must reaffirm. But he makes an
absolute claim which Shakespeare will not support. It is right for man to feel, as Edmund does, that society
exists for man, not man for society. It is not right to assert the kind of man Edmund would erect to this
supremacy."[23]
The play offers an alternative to the feudal-Machiavellian polarity, an alternative foreshadowed in France's
speech (I.1.245–256), in Lear and Gloucester's prayers (III.4. 28–36; IV.1.61–66), and in the figure of
Cordelia. Until the decent society is achieved, we are meant to take as role-model (though qualified by
Shakespearean ironies) Edgar, "the machiavel of goodness,"[24]
 endurance, courage and "ripeness."[23]
The play also contains references to disputes between King James I
and Parliament. In the 1604 elections to the House of Commons, Sir
John Fortescue, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was defeated by a
member of the Buckinghamshire gentry, Sir Francis Goodwin.
[25]
Displeased with the result, James declared the result of the
Buckinghhamshire election invalid, and swore in Fortescue as the MP
for Buckinghamshire while the House of Commons insisted on
swearing in Goodwin, leading to a clash between King and
Parliament over who had the right to decide who sat in the House of
Commons.
[25] The MP Thomas Wentworth, the son of another MP
Peter Wentworth—often imprisoned under Elizabeth for raising the
question of the succession in the Commons—was most forceful in
protesting James's attempts to reduce the powers of the House of
Commons, saying the King could not just declare the results of an election invalid if he disliked who had won
the seat as he was insisting that he could.[26] The character of Kent resembles Peter Wentworth in the way
which is tactless and blunt in advising Lear, but his point is valid that Lear should be more careful with his
friends and advisers.
[26]
Just as the House of Commons had argued to James that their loyalty was to the constitution of England, not to
the King personally, Kent insists his loyalty is institutional, not personal, as he is loyal to the realm of which
the king is head, not to Lear himself, and he tells Lear to behave better for the good of the realm.
[26] By
contrast, Lear makes an argument similar to James that as king, he holds absolute power and could disregard
the views of his subjects if they displease him whenever he liked.[26]
In the play, the characters like the Fool,
Kent and Cordelia, whose loyalties are institutional, seeing their first loyalty to the realm, are portrayed more
favorably than those like Regan and Goneril, who insist they are only loyal to the king, seeing their loyalties as
personal.
[26] Likewise, James was notorious for his riotous, debauched lifestyle and his preference for
sycophantic courtiers who were forever singing his praises out of the hope for advancement, aspects of his
court that closely resemble the court of King Lear, who starts out in the play with a riotous, debauched court of
sycophantic courtiers.
[27] Kent criticises Oswald as a man unworthy of office who has only been promoted
because of his sycophancy, telling Lear that he should be loyal to those who are willing to tell him the truth, a
statement that many in England wished that James would heed.[27]
Furthermore, James VI of Scotland inherited the throne of England upon the death of Elizabeth I in 1603,
thereby uniting the kingdoms of the island of Britain into one, and a major issue of his reign was the attempt to
forge a common British identity.
[28] James had given his sons Henry and Charles the titles of Duke of
Cornwell and Duke of Albany, the same titles bore by the men married to Regan and Goneril.
[29] The play
begins with Lear ruling all of Britain and ends with him destroying his realm; the critic Andrew Hadfield
argued that the division of Britain by Lear was an inversion of the unification of Britain by James, who
believed his policies would result in a well governed and prosperous unified realm being passed on to his
heir.
[29] Hadfield argued that the play was meant as a warning to James as in the play a monarch loses
everything by giving in to his sycophantic courtiers who only seek to use him while neglecting those who truly
loved him.
[29] Hadfield also argued that the world of Lear's court is "childish" with Lear presenting himself as
the father of the nation and requiring all of his subjects, not just his children, to address him in paternal terms,
which infantises most of the people around him, which pointedly references James's statement in his 1598
book The Trew Law of Free Monarchies that the king is the "father of the nation," for whom all of his subjects
are his children.[30]King Lear provides a basis for "the primary enactment of psychic breakdown in English literary history".
[31]
The play begins with Lear's "near-fairytale narcissism".
[32]
Given the absence of legitimate mothers in King Lear, Coppélia Kahn[33] provides a psychoanalytic
interpretation of the "maternal subtext" found in the play. According to Kahn, Lear's old age forces him to
regress into an infantile disposition, and he now seeks a love that is traditionally satisfied by a mothering
woman, but in the absence of a real mother, his daughters become the mother figures. Lear's contest of love
between Goneril, Regan, and Cordelia serves as the binding agreement; his daughters will get their inheritance
provided that they care for him, especially Cordelia, on whose "kind nursery" he will greatly depend.
Cordelia's refusal to dedicate herself to him and love him as more than a father has been interpreted by some as
a resistance to incest, but Kahn also inserts the image of a rejecting mother. The situation is now a reversal of
parent-child roles, in which Lear's madness is a childlike rage due to his deprivation of filial/maternal care.
Even when Lear and Cordelia are captured together, his madness persists as Lear envisions a nursery in prison,
where Cordelia's sole existence is for him. It is only with Cordelia's death that his fantasy of a daughter-mother
ultimately diminishes, as King Lear concludes with only male characters living.
Sigmund Freud asserted that Cordelia symbolises Death. Therefore, when the play begins with Lear rejecting
his daughter, it can be interpreted as him rejecting death; Lear is unwilling to face the finitude of his being. The
play's poignant ending scene, wherein Lear carries the body of his beloved Cordelia, was of great importance
to Freud. In this scene, Cordelia forces the realization of his finitude, or as Freud put it, she causes him to
"make friends with the necessity of dying".
[34] Shakespeare had particular intentions with Cordelia's death,
and was the only writer to have Cordelia killed (in the version by the Nahum Tate, she continues to live
happily, and in Holinshed's, she restores her father and succeeds him).
Alternatively, an analysis based on Adlerian theory suggests that the King's contest among his daughters in
Act I has more to do with his control over the unmarried Cordelia.
[35] This theory indicates that the King's
"dethronement"
[36]
 might have led him to seek control that he lost after he divided his land.
In his study of the character-portrayal of Edmund, Harold Bloom refers to him as "Shakespeare's most original
character".
[37]
Psychoanalytic and psychosocial interpretations
